Our Properties: Gamasutra GameCareerGuide IndieGames GDC Vault GDC IGF App Dev Stories ADC GAO SEARCH GO GAME JOBS updates Blogs events contractors newsletter store SEARCH GO ALL CONSOLE/PC GAMES SOCIAL/ONLINE GAMES SMARTPHONE/TABLET GAMES INDEPENDENT GAMES         PROGRAMMING ART AUDIO DESIGN PRODUCTION BIZ/MARKETING Latest Jobs View All     RSS May 17, 2015 2K Las Vegas Lead QA Tester Monolith Productions Art Lead, Animation Monolith Productions Staff Character Artist GG|Interactive Game Programmer Shiver Entertainment Producer - Make Great Games! Torn Banner Studios Senior Multiplayer Level Designer Latest Blogs View All     Post     RSS May 17, 2015 Psychology and Video Game Kickstarters The Tools and Tech of All Things Die [2] The crack where the light gets in [3] Why Necrosoft Games will not 'renounce' pixel art [15] Independence and Existentialism [2] Features View All     RSS May 17, 2015 Postmortem: Pinball-RPG hybrid Rollers of the Realm [5] Best of 2014: Gamasutra's Top Games of the Year [10] Q&A: New AAA studio from 2K Games all about players' stories [7] Special Reports Game Design Deep Dives A Peek Into the Future of VR: Oculus Connect 2014 The YouTube Effect VR/Advanced Input/Output Digital Publishing Microconsole Game Development Crowdfunding and Alternative Funding Press Releases May 17, 2015 PR Newswire View All Games Press Indie Bubble Shooter, Intergalactic Bubbles,... Indie Bubble Shooter, Intergalactic Bubbles,... BVS Solitaire Collection for iPad/iPhone/iPod... BVS Solitaire Collection for iPad/iPhone/iPod... Plugged the game pays homage to pop art icons View All     RSS Calendar View All     Submit Event Revolutionary Learning 2015: Using Games and Simulations to Solve Critical Issues in Public Health Washington, United States 05.20.2015 23rd of May 2015 – Open Day at Kamienice Malczewskiego with Allcon Osiedla Gdañsk, Poland 05.23.2015 23rd of May 2015 – Open Day at Kamienice Malczewskiego with Allcon Osiedla Gdañsk, Poland 05.23.2015 GMASA - Global Mobile App Summit & Awards Chennai, India 05.28.2015 About Editor-In-Chief: Kris Graft Blog Director: Christian Nutt Senior Contributing Editor: Brandon Sheffield News Editors: Alex Wawro Advertising/ Recruitment: Jennifer Sulik Recruitment/ Education: Pocco Jimenez Contact Gamasutra Report a Problem Submit News Comment Guidelines Blogging Guidelines How We Work Gama Network If you enjoy reading this site, you might also want to check out these UBM Tech sites: Game Career Guide Indie Games 4 The cunning ruse: Deception in game design   MAME is going open source to be a 'learning tool for developers' 1 Video: Procedurally generating space-dungeons for Galak-Z 4 Going mobile the right way: A Crack Attack postmortem 4 The opportunity frontier of truly social games 14 Indie devs see successful Kickstarter sunk by fraudulent backer Latest Updates 5 The future of Konami is 'mobile first', says company chief In a new interview, Konami chief Hideki Hayawaka explains that he's planning to "clearly divide management and creative roles" as he transitions the company to focus on mobile. 1 Made for TV: Double Fine's Costume Quest gets its own cartoon Double Fine Business Man Greg Rice says the San Francisco indie studio is working with Frederator Studios to produce a cartoon based on Double Fine's Costume Quest games.   Get a job: Demiurge Studios seeks an experienced Game Designer Cambridge-based F2P studio Demiurge is now owned by SEGA Networks, and the team looking for someone with a few years of experience to serve as a Senior Game Designer on a new mobile/PC F2P title. 1 Video: Procedurally generating space-dungeons for Galak-Z At GDC 2015 engineer Zach Aikman offered a breakdown of Galak-Z's dungeon generator, including its unorthodox math, and his thoughts on balancing hand-crafted and procedural content. 32 Don't Miss: The psychology underlying Diablo III's loot system In this classic 2012 feature psychologist Jamie Madigan explores the psychological factors at play in Blizzard's Diablo III, offering insight into why its loot system didn't feel satisfying. 3 Developers come clean about the realities of crunch Kotaku has published a thorough feature aimed at exposing crunch culture to a broader audience that features developers coming clean about how they had to crunch, or why they made others do so.   MAME is going open source to be a 'learning tool for developers' The folks who maintain MAME (Multiple Arcade Machine Emulator) are aiming to make the project completely open source in order to expand both its pool of supporters and its utility to developers and historians. 4 Down to the letter: The importance of typography in video games "Typography can make or break the aesthetic of a game. As game designers, we use type to communicate with our players, not only in the words we use, but also in the way we present those words." 2 The existentialism of independent development "We are all free, for better or worse, and that all the events in our life that are under our control occur either because of our actions or inactions. There is no safety net. No divine path set ahead of you."   How to understand and interpret KPIs "We can estimate the risk our work represents, and the precise objectives we have to reach in order to survive as a game company. Those tools are collectively called Key Performance Indicators, or KPIs." 2 Here's the rig players need for your Oculus Rift games Following up on the recent announcement of a 2016 first quarter launch window for its Oculus Rift headset, Oculus VR has announced recommended PC specs to run Oculus games. 4 The cunning ruse: Deception in game design We talk to SpyParty developer Chris Hecker, and Sub Rosa's Alex Austin about deception as a game mechanic, and why it lends itself so well to multiplayer.   Tricks for marketing games with no budget "Do you stay consistent with writing code or creating new art for your game? Do you hit your milestones? Awesome. Now do the same with your marketing!"   Former AAA devs raise $3.5M for a new mobile game studio in China Directive Games, a mobile game studio founded in Hong Kong last year by ex-AAA devs from companies like DICE, CCP, Square Enix and Tencent, has raised $3.5 million to make "quality" mobile games. 1 $200M in profits for Candy Crush maker, in a single quarter Social game company King continues to reap big profits in the face of flagging revenues and an expanding game catalog that still revolves around its flagship title: Candy Crush Saga.   Get a job: BioWare is hiring a Quality Analyst BioWare's Edmonton office, perhaps best known for its work on the Mass Effect and Dragon Age franchises, seeks a quality analyst to test and measure player experience of the studio's current project.   Video: Not My Story - Mistakes made in Kachina's development As part of the Failure Workshop at GDC 2015's Indie Games Summit, Donut County designer Ben Esposito talks about the mistakes he made while developing a game that "used Hopi folklore" as its theme. 20 Don't Miss: An MMO dev reflects on the decade of World of Warcraft Raph Koster looks back at the MMO juggernaut: "If anything, it’s possibly the biggest game design achievement in all of virtual world history." 3 Watch a Republic Commando dev play the game and recount its creation Heads up: Star Wars: Republic Commando lead programmer Brett Douville has begun livestreaming himself playing the game on his Twitch channel while discussing the ins and outs of its development. 2 Space Engineers dev offers $100k and full source code to modders Keen Software House is making a show of supporting modders by releasing source code for its game Space Engineers and setting aside $100k to fund development of mods based on the game or its engine.   Blog: How mixing genres leads to game music inspiration "In early days, I tended to drift (as most inexperienced composers do) into the well-known clichés of genre... By the time I started scoring for games, I was beginning to get bored with my own approach." 5 An indie developer's toolbox How doing weekly standup meetings with other small indie developers keeps Tim Conkling honest about his work and on-task for the week. 4 The opportunity frontier of truly social games A former Supercell dev muses: "What makes a good social game, and how do we keep improving the experience in future social games? Here are some of my current, still evolving thoughts on these questions." 7 Funding your game startup An article that tries to cover "all different possible scenarios" for getting your studio funded -- a list of resources and methods you can try to get money to make your game. 4 Opinion: Instruction manuals are game mechanics Instruction manuals for video games are seen as less of a necessity these days, but they still can give a game a bit more soul, even today. Katherine Cross explains. [Read More] Get a Job! Gamasutra's Job Board is the most diverse, active, and established board of its kind in the Game Industry. Serving companies of all sizes. APPLY NOW Write for Gamasutra! Share your thoughts, knowledge and ideas with the largest community of game developers in the world. If we like what we see, we'll promote your post on our home page. START BLOGGING NOW From the Community   Psychology and Video Game Kickstarters by Jamie Madigan 3 psychological phenomena that can help determine the success (or failure) of a Kickstarter video...   TVGS Ludum Dare Real-World Meeting Post Mortem by Taro Omiya For Ludum Dare 32, we hosted our second Ludum Dare Real-World Meeting here at the Tech Valley Game... 2 6 Tips For Effective Push Notifications by Evan Fradley-Pereira Despite their usefulness, spamming and irrelevant content have made players suspect of push... 2 The Tools and Tech of All Things Die by Trent Polack Some things written about the tech I'm employing/integrating/whatever-ing for my next game, All... 3 The crack where the light gets in by Michael Samyn Realism is attractive but can get banal very quickly. It is where art deviates from reality that we... [Read More] Press Releases May 17, 2015 PR Newswire View All Games Press Indie Bubble Shooter, Intergalactic Bubbles,... Indie Bubble Shooter, Intergalactic Bubbles,... BVS Solitaire Collection for iPad/iPhone/iPod... BVS Solitaire Collection for iPad/iPhone/iPod... Plugged the game pays homage to pop art icons View All     RSS Contractors Exis, LLC XCOM, CIV, Bioshock Infinite, World of Tanks, the list goes on.Top publishers and defense contractors count on Exis to deliver their assets. Why not join them, and get the best art possible for your projects? Agni Interactive, Inc Agni Interactive is a creative content development company focusing on bringing our clients’ creative vision to life through concept art/pre-production, production art services, mobile game design and development services. Our clients include DeNA, Storm8 SomaTone Interactive Inc. SomaTone Interactive (STi) is the leading provider of premium music, sound design, voice-over, and audio integration services for gaming and interactive entertainment companies. With over 1000 games to our credit over our 10 year history, including top s Zvky Design Studio Zvky Design Studio, is a next-gen entertainment design firm based in the "silicon valley of India". We are a "Quality First" studio where we focus our passion, energy and skills to deliver exemplary next-gen art for all platforms. Clean Cuts Music & Sound Design Clean Cuts is an award winning audio facility with over 25 years of experience in original music composition, custom sound design, audio implementation, and voice over casting. We have 14 audio suites, 16 sound designers, and staff 3 full-time composers. Guenther & Associates A CPA Firm that provides Specialized Accounting, Legal and Tax Services to the Video Game Industry. Roboto Roboto is a young art production studio with AAA game development in its DNA. We are dedicated to creating excellent art quality and providing a reliable service at competitive rates [View More] Education Postmortem: Algonquin College's Capstone Project Ryan Schmidt reflects on his experience with Algonquin College's Capstone project, a team-based initiative that sees students collaborating over the course of three semesters. Design 101: Design Goals Dan Felder outlines the key questions designers should answer when crafting a satisfying player experience. Match Game Mechanics: An Exhaustive Survey Gamelogic's staff critically examines the mechanics that define landmark puzzle games like Bejeweled, Columns, Threes, and more. UBM TECH BRANDS Black Hat Cloud Connect Dark Reading Enterprise Connect Fusion GDC GTEC Gamasutra HDI InformationWeek Interop Network Computing No Jitter Tower & Small Cell Summit COMMUNITIES SERVED Enterprise IT Enterprise Communications Game Development Information Security IT Services & Support WORKING WITH US Advertising Contacts Event Calendar Tech Marketing Solutions Contact Us Licensing Terms of Service Privacy Statement Copyright © 2015 UBM Tech, All rights reserved