Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Interviews » Article: Morsel Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! More Like This Humble Hearts YouYun Tech Coin App, LLC Andrew Russell Studios Cadenza Interactive Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» 0 Like 1Likes Dislike Morsel By Oli Wilkinson | Published Oct 15 2009 09:39 AM in Interviews game play build xna dream games development framework team Hide If you find this article contains errors or problems rendering it unreadable (missing images or files, mangled code, improper text formatting, etc) please contact the editor so corrections can be made. Thank you for helping us improve this resource Matthew Stenback talks about the development of Kaleidoscope, a top 6 finalist in this year’s "http://www.dreambuildplay.com/main/default.aspx">Dream Build Play competition. A video of Kaleidoscope is available on YouTube How many people in your team and what role did they play in the development of your game? There are currently 3 people on our team: I am the lead designer and programmer, Sang Han is our talented artist, and Mattias Häggström Gerdt is our creative musician. Describe your game to someone who hasn't played it before? Kaleidoscope is an adventure platformer set in a world shrouded by darkness. You must help Tint traverse through the surreal environments collecting color pigments to restore life and color to the world. What inspired the idea behind your game? I wanted to make a game that was lighthearted and didn’t rely on violence to drive a satisfying experience. To capture this lighthearted feel I referenced what kids did for fun. Instantly a coloring book popped into my head and I loved the idea of a world that evolved through coloring. After a lot of pondering about how to transfer that elegantly into a video game, Kaleidoscope was born. What type of game development team would you class yourself as? I would classify Morsel as an independent development team. We take it more seriously than just a hobby, however we are just starting out so it’s not a full time endeavour yet. How long have you (and your team) been programming? I am the only programmer on the team and I have been programming in C# for about 5 months. I have been familiar with other types of computer scripting languages like HTML, CSS, and Javascript for several years however C# is the first real programming language I’ve learned. When I was starting out I got a lot of help from online resources and of course the XNA community. How do you feel about being one of the top games in the Dream Build Play 2009 competition? I’m ecstatic that Kaleidoscope was chosen as one of the top games for Dream Build Play 2009. It’s such an uplifting feeling to know that people really appreciate what you’ve created. What does Dream Build Play mean to you, personally, as a development team? We feel that it represents the opportunity to shine among the top talent in the indie game scene. Have you ever entered Dream Build Play before? This is the first time I’ve entered Dream Build Play, however I thought it would be a great way to get more people looking at the game and hopefully playing it too! Would you enter another Dream Build Play competition? Of course! What do you feel that participating in Dream Build Play provides for the game development community? It’s quite hard for indie developers to make a name for themselves in this highly competitive industry. Participating in Dream Build Play gives indies a chance to get the kind of exposure they really need for their games to be noticed. Describe the process that you and your team took from idea to finished game I had started a design document even before I met Mattias or Sang, however the document mainly consisted of how I wanted to flesh out the coloring concept and had little to do with game mechanics. Most of the mechanics and storyline evolved naturally over the course of developing the game. Personally, the designing and brainstorming sessions were the most interesting parts of the process to me. On the other hand, I was new to programming so every technical difficulty I ran into required research on how to solve it. This was both time consuming and not very much fun. Did you have enough time to complete your entry? Kaleidoscope has four distinct worlds to play through to keep the game feeling fresh and fun. Each world has its own unique art style, music, and gameplay mechanics. Unfortunately, we didn’t have enough time to include all of these features in the build for Dream Build Play. Needless to say, we will be adding a considerable amount of content and polish to the game before it‘s released. If you were writing your game again, what would you do differently next time? I would map out all of the main systems that the game required on paper to make sure I had a clear vision of what the framework would look like before I started programming. And what would you do the same way? I really like the process of prototyping, testing, and tweaking so I would certainly do that again. Have you ever used the XNA Framework before? This is my first experience with the XNA Framework. The idea of being able to create games for the Xbox 360 myself was what really influenced me to try out XNA Game Studio. There wasn’t one specific resource I used when trying to learn the framework. I found that some concepts are easier to learn through samples, while others are easier to learn through tutorials, so it’s best to tap into as many different resources as you can. When developing your game did you use any third party components? I implemented the Farseer Physics Engine into my framework and for the most part it went quite smoothly. They also have a knowledgeable community that’s always willing to help. I believe in giving back to the community so I wouldn’t hesitate to make any of my code public if it would help somebody. What did you feel, if anything, XNA Game Studio enabled you to do well when working on your game? XNA Game Studio is an excellent framework to start programming games on. It has many useful libraries that take care of low level tasks which enable you to really focus on the actual game programming. Did you have any particular challenges to overcome when it came to running your game on the Xbox 360? It was actually a breeze to get the game up and running on the Xbox 360… at 2 frames per second. Using the profiling monitors included in XNA Game Studio, I found out very quickly that the Xbox 360 doesn’t like intensive math and it requires you to be somewhat crafty with your code to avoid such bottlenecks. Which XNA Framework version did you end up targeting (3.0 or 3.1?) While I started the project using XNA 3.0, I switched over to 3.1 mid way through development. I took advantage of the new sound effect API and video player features as a result of the upgrade. If you were to offer some advice to other game developers, what would you say to them? It’s going to take longer than you think. Will you use XNA Game Studio to make another game? We will definitely consider using XNA Game Studio to make another game in the future. Now that you've got a completed game, what are you planning to do next? We will still be working on Kaleidoscope for a little while yet, however our team works very well together and we are always bouncing new ideas off of one another so expect many more games from us in the future! Would you create any further games for the Indie Game portal? It is quite likely that we will create more games for the Indie Game portal for a few reasons: We are familiar with XNA Game Studio, the development costs are relatively low, and it’s the easiest way to get our games onto the Xbox 360. Finally, do you have any other comments you wish to make about your game, your team, the XNA Framework, Dream Build Play or game development? Making games takes a lot of hard work but you feel an indescribable sense of accomplishment and satisfaction when all the pieces fit together in the end. I am so grateful to be making games with two phenomenally talented people. I’d also like to thank the people behind Dream Build Play for this wonderful opportunity. Comments Note: Please offer only positive, constructive comments - we are looking to promote a positive atmosphere where collaboration is valued above all else. Home » Home » Articles » Business » Interviews » Article: Morsel English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy