Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Interviews » Article: YouYun Tech Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! More Like This Morsel Humble Hearts Coin App, LLC Andrew Russell Studios Cadenza Interactive Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» 0 Like 1Likes Dislike YouYun Tech By Oli Wilkinson | Published Sep 30 2009 09:10 AM in Interviews game xna did play dream build kung development time Hide If you find this article contains errors or problems rendering it unreadable (missing images or files, mangled code, improper text formatting, etc) please contact the editor so corrections can be made. Thank you for helping us improve this resource Hu Ling answers our questions about the creation of the game “HurricaneX2 Evolution”, which came fourth place in this year’s "http://www.dreambuildplay.com/main/default.aspx">Dream Build Play competition. How many people in your team and what role did they play in the development of your game? The core team is consisted of 4 members: Game Director SHAN, Jun is in charge of almost everything creative for the game Technical Director HU, Ling is responsible for the engine and tools Art Director ZHOU, Ming does the concept design and art quality control Animator ZHOU, Rui takes care of the animation work. Describe your game to someone who hasn't played it before? It is a game developed by a Chinese Kung Fu practitioner himself and it is a game for you to experience the way of a talented Kung Fu hero who will face the tough challenges from Kung Fu masters from all works of life in ancient China. What inspired the idea behind your game? The inspiration comes from real life. The game director SHAN, Jun is not only an enthusiastic game developer and player who loves western and Japanese action games but also a Kung Fu and Karate practitioner. For years, he has been dreaming of making a genuine and marvellous Chinese Kung Fu action game by himself. Deeply rooted in the Chinese culture, the game is an action game inspired by the traditional Chinese philosophy, for instance, Zen mind of Shaolin Kung Fu, the internal power of Tai chi chuan (Taoism), and the efficiency and relaxation of Wing Chun, as well as Bruce Lee's combat system and philosophy, Jeet Kune Do (Way of the Intercepting Fist), and so on. We also got the inspiration from some Kung Fu movies such as Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, and IP MAN, and etc. How long have you (and your team) been programming? It is a long story. The original idea started from 2003 to 2005 by a DOS prototype created by our Game Director Shan, Jun. We created the first version named HurricaneX in 3 months in 2007. Then we continue working on it and created HurricaneX2 in 2008, after that we spent almost another year to create HurricaneX2 Evolution in 2009. How do you feel about being one of the top games in the Dream Build Play 2009 competition? Pretty good. What does Dream Build Play mean to you, personally, as a development team? It is a good platform for us to show our game to more people around the world. Have you ever entered Dream Build Play before? We were one of the top 20 in 2007 and one of the top four in 2008. Did you do anything differently in your entry this year? The level design has changed a lot and we have added more new levels and the shop system has been added. You can say it is a complete new game. What do you feel that participating in Dream Build Play provides for the game development community? By participating in Dream Build Play, we would love to show the world that DBP is striving to support the independent developers and game hobbyists a fair platform to demonstrate their talent. Did you design the game up front, or did you let the game idea evolve during development? As we said in previous questions, the game evolved in many years of development. What was the most interesting/fun part of the process? The most fun part is to see players testing our game. And the least interesting/fun part? The least fun part is debugging. Did you have enough time to complete your entry? You will never get enough time to finish a game, so we have to trade off from time to time. If you were writing your game again, what would you do differently next time? We will do a lot of usability tests as what we have done this time. Have you ever used the XNA Framework before? Yes, and we have built our own 3d game engine based on XNA. How did you learn to use the XNA Framework? We learn it through Self Taught. When developing your game did you use any third party components? No, because there was not many good choices when we started using XNA, and it is more convenient for the dev team to use our own technology. Would you consider making any of your code/libraries available on sites such as CodePlex for other XNA developers to use? No, for we do not have time to do the documentation to make it friendly enough for other developers. What did you feel, if anything, XNA Game Studio enabled you to do well when working on your game? XNA Game Studio enabled us to use C# to develop the game, and that was really cool. Did you have any challenges to overcome whilst using the XNA Framework? No. Did you have any particular challenges to overcome when it came to running your game on the Xbox 360? No. Did you take advantage of any of the new features provided by the XNA framework 3.1? No, we do no t use any new features in 3.1, because we want the project to be compatible with XNA3.0. If you were to offer some advice to other game developers, what would you say to them? Never give up your dream! Will you use XNA Game Studio to make another game? Yes, of course. Would you enter another Dream Build Play competition? Maybe, but we are not sure at the moment. Now that you've got a completed game, what are you planning to do next? Actually the game is still under development, and we are planning to finish the game and get it published. Finally, do you have any other comments you wish to make about your game, your team, the XNA Framework, Dream Build Play or game development HurricaneX2 Evolution is a very exciting action game, and the team is great too! Thanks to the DBP competition where we could have the opportunity to express our ideas by our game through the XNA Framework. Comments Note: Please offer only positive, constructive comments - we are looking to promote a positive atmosphere where collaboration is valued above all else. Home » Home » Articles » Business » Interviews » Article: YouYun Tech English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy