Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Production and Management » Article: 300 Employees On Multiple Continents: How We Work Without An Office Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! More Like This Social Media Handbook Policy Working Nowhere and Everywhere Tales from the Loneliest Frontier Overcoming Procrastination Business Planning Part 1 Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» 1 Like 8Likes Dislike 300 Employees On Multiple Continents: How We Work Without An Office By Kirill Kliushkin | Published Oct 23 2014 07:35 AM in Production and Management Peer Reviewed by (Gaiiden, Geometrian, Waterlimon) Offices business development motivation management task management working remotely Hide We decided to go office-less at the very start. For a small translation agency focused on working with IT companies via the Internet, this was a logical step. Now, ten years later, Alconost includes more than 300 people worldwide. Our staff is diverse: besides translators, we employ marketing specialists, contextual advertising experts, sales staff, editors, localization managers, and video production pros. But despite our growth, we still think that offices are inefficient and we feel good about the choice we made. As company co-founder, I, Kirill Kliushkin, would like to share about how we make the absence of an office work for us. Not having an office has had a large and positive effect on our business. Our clients are located all over the world, so they often write to our managers outside of our local working hours. Because of this time difference, an ordinary, office-bound company would take days to communicate with distant clients and resolve issues. But not us. We do not hold our employees to a strict eight-hour regimen, instead asking them to answer messages quickly whenever they have the opportunity. Clients truly appreciate fast answers, even if it is just to say that “I will get the necessary information and write back to you tomorrow.” The client is happy, which means that we are happy too. We have gone without offices not because we wanted to take a more relaxed pace. If anything, the answer is the opposite: often tasks need to be finished in minutes, not hours. Half of orders on our Nitro rapid online translation service are completed in less than two hours. We promise to reply to all client questions regarding Nitro within one hour. If we were stuck to a fixed office schedule, we could never attain the responsiveness that we have today. Our formula: remote work + people + freedom - control Our formula for success consists of remote work plus excellent people and an open schedule, minus overbearing control. Remote work is common enough these days – work wherever you want, as long as you get the job done. The same goes for the schedule too: we do not actually care when and how much you work. What counts is that tasks are resolved, processes launched, projects completed quickly, and the other employees not waiting because of any delays from you. Often I find it easiest to write articles or scripts at 2 or 3 AM, when the day’s problems are finally set aside and I can get more done in two hours than I have during all of the last week. We do not ask our employees to fill out time sheets or, even worse, install tracking software on their computers to monitor time worked and get screenshots of what they are working on. Our approach is fundamentally different. Standing over an employee’s shoulder with a stopwatch and a calendar is counterproductive both for the employee and for the company. If a person is putting in the proper effort, we can see this by the tasks that get done and the satisfaction of colleagues and clients. If someone is lagging behind, we can see this too. We value the results, not the processes that led to these results. Business is what interests us, not control. The next component of our formula is “excellent people”. Without them, nothing else works. But “excellent” is the key part. If someone just wants to sit in a desk chair for eight hours and does not care what they are working on, that person would not last long here. If work for someone is exclusively a way to earn money, that person would not fit us either. How do I identify excellence? My way involves asking a lot of questions at the job interview – some of them personal, some of them uncomfortably so. By the end of the conversation, I have a high-resolution psychological portrait of the candidate. Looking back at all of my interviews with potential employees, I think that our conversations have usually allowed figuring out right away whether a person is the right one for us. Mistakes can always happen, of course, and sometimes employees lose their motivation and start to drift. We battle for each employee: we try to figure out the reason for this change in attitude, inspire the employee to get back “into the groove”, and think of interesting work that could excite him or her. If we still lose the battle, we cut our losses and part ways. Motivation vs. internal crisis If we are on the topic of motivation, I should add a few words about the importance of motivation for employees at office-less companies. It is not a question of salary. When you are not sitting side by side with your boss, colleagues, or subordinates, it is easy to forget that you are part of a team. After working online for six months or so, an internal crisis sets in – you can forget that you work at a company and fall out of the corporate culture. Even Internet-centric companies like ours have a culture: in our case, one of care for the client, the desire to be a step ahead of the game, and the ability to answer questions that the client has not even thought of yet. There is no one-size-fits-all technique for fighting off these teleworking blues. One effective method in our toolbox is to ask the employee to write an article for the media or to speak at a conference. While the employee is preparing the text or presentation, he or she dives into the topic and feels like part of something bigger. Another way is to simply meet and socialize informally, maybe drink a little whiskey. One way or another, managers need to think proactively about how to preserve motivation and help employees to feel socially needed, so that they do not suddenly snap one fine day and jump ship for a company with a plush office and after-work drinks on Fridays. It is absolutely critical to be in contact with every employee and provide them with proper feedback. Don’t forget to praise a job well done, and don’t be afraid to say if a job could have been done better – but critique the work, not the person. The most important thing is to keep the lines of communication open and not be silent. I learned this the hard way, unfortunately. Last spring I traveled together with the other co-founder, Alexander Murauski, to Montenegro (another advantage of remote work, incidentally!) for three months with our families. All of the hassles of the temporary move distracted us from communication with employees. As a result, we lost a pair of workers who, if we had been “virtually” at their side, could have stayed, had we been able to help them in maintaining their motivation. But leaving the country is not the only way of losing contact with employees. Simply concentrating too much on one aspect of the business can leave other employees feeling lonely and uncared for. Now I know how dangerous this can be. Trello, Skype and The Cloud Setting up workflows is much more important for an office-free company than it is for a company with employees housed in a giant cubicle farm. We realized this right away at the beginning of our company’s growth, when we needed to hire a second and later third project manager for handling client requests. We had to design processes and mechanisms to make telework just as efficient and seamless as working with a colleague at a neighboring desk. Finding task management tools was a long effort. We tried Megaplan and Bitrix24, but later migrated to Trello, which is both very convenient and intuitive. Trello remains our project management tool of choice, although we continue to refine our processes. For localization of large projects, we often work with translators through a cloud-based platform. The rest of our communications go through email, Skype or Google Hangouts, which allow sharing screens in virtual group conferences. All of our documents and files are stored on Google Drive. We forego Microsoft Office and other offline programs in favor of online documents only. The advantages are that documents are accessible from any device and the group collaboration/revision process is convenient. We also have created an internal wiki to centralize and systematize our knowledge, rules, references, and procedures. Everything is in there, from step-by-step setup of Alconost email accounts to basic principles for working in Trello. Wiki articles are regularly added and updated, which helps new employees to get oriented quickly and makes work get done quicker. Automating routine tasks and simplifying business processes is key. This saves work time, reduces headcount needs, and simply frees up resources for more creative tasks. A monotonous task that eats up five minutes every day will consume almost a week over the course of a year. And of course, I recommend acquiring the tools you need so that you can work anytime, anywhere. With today’s devices and mobile Internet access, this is eminently doable. I remember when I spent an entire day writing video scripts, communicated with clients, and managed the company as I was waiting in line at a customs checkpoint. All I needed was my mobile phone and its five-inch screen! Three tips for those working without an office First: create a schedule. Wake up at the same time every day and figure out which times are most productive. People need rhythm. Second, if you cannot work properly where you are, create the right setting so that you can. You simply cannot be productive in a two-room apartment with screaming kids and hyperactive pets. You need your own clearly marked, private space. For me, this is the study in my apartment. For Alexander, the other Alconost co-founder, the solution to two noisy children is a small room at a nearby business center. And third: when there is no set schedule, your working day imperceptibly begins to “morph”. You do not have the clear division between personal time and working time that an office gives. Some people become fatigued by this, which is a sign that remote work is probably not right for them. When you like your work – if it is something that you are passionate about – it does not matter which of the day’s 24 hours you choose to spend doing it. Personally, I don’t even like the word “work”. I don’t “work”, I live and simultaneously pursue my business. It makes me happier – and lets me truly live. About the Author(s) Kirill Kliushkin started out as a localization project manager at Alconost translation agency, and then performed various marketing and business development activities as well as co-founded and built the video production company Alconost Video (http://alconost.com/video). Currently, the COO of Alconost (http://alconost.com) License GDOL (Gamedev.net Open License) Comments Gaiiden Oct 22 2014 11:35 PM   Clients truly appreciate fast answers, even if it is just to say that “I will get the necessary information and write back to you tomorrow.”   THIS. Most people don't realize how great it is to get a response from someone, even if it's just to say they'll get back to you the next day.     Often I find it easiest to write articles or scripts at 2 or 3 AM...   That's about the time I tend to like to edit and publish them some days     when there is no set schedule, your working day imperceptibly begins to “morph”. You do not have the clear division between personal time and working time that an office gives.   Yea, I wrote a journal post about this years ago myself. Geometrian Oct 23 2014 01:23 AM Nice article. Two things: one of your tags is typoed. Second, (and I don't know if this works within GDev.net's peer review process), while you have overall good points, I would like to see it be less . . . ramble-y. Some minor formatting (e.g. boldface some subsections) could even be enough to give it some structure. Alconost Oct 23 2014 05:20 AM Nice article. Two things:  Thank you very much, I've updated the article. Glad to read you found it nice! mohessaid Oct 23 2014 06:07 AM This is cool, and efficient. I tried when I was a student to work with a company(http://gteamers.com) like this. They use lot of things (websites, solutions, services, ...), I never heard about, till that day. They were really cool, and I am on my way to do like you did guys. This is a good thing. I love your article so much. And if you can tell some stories about bad experiences (if they don't harm), and solution you came with to solve them, The view will complete. GeneralJist Oct 26 2014 02:08 PM Very interesting & informative aricle. Right up my ally, as well as poinient for these times.   I fully agree with the key points, such as how important responsiveness is. as well as the adaptive mindset of ssocial & profetional concerns.   I liken such modes of thought & life style as the "on call" mentality. Some people can handle it, you never know when a coworker, a friend, or contact will need your assistance, so you structure your life to acomidate for such varables.   Some like me, actually prefer this to a consistant X hour in a building day. others need and  are more functional with the structure an "office location" brings.   I am curous tough, how do you interview people? Online vs. ofline interaction and all that?   Also, do yall subscribe to standard buisness structure, or is it different since the company is primarally online mediated? Alconost Oct 29 2014 07:35 AM I am curous tough, how do you interview people? Online vs. ofline interaction and all that?   Also, do yall subscribe to standard buisness structure, or is it different since the company is primarally online mediated? We conduct interviews with remote workers via Skype. We have a test job and such questions at the interview which allow us to imagine a portrait of the employee in details, and make a right decision.    What about the business structure - Alconost has a common structure, nothing special. Note: Please offer only positive, constructive comments - we are looking to promote a positive atmosphere where collaboration is valued above all else. Home » Home » Articles » Business » Production and Management » Article: 300 Employees On Multiple Continents: How We Work Without An Office English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy