Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Contests Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Monthly Article Contest Write an article for our community members and automatically enter our monthly article competition. Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Post an Article We are holding our first article competition for April of 2013 and we want you to join in! The contest is open to all members who contribute an article during the month of the competition. At the end of the month our site staff will select up to 10 finalist articles and put them up for a vote by the community at large. The member receiving the most votes for their article will receive a prize of their choice from our monthly prize pool. Winners will receive a GDNet+ subscription for a year, $50 Amazon.com Gift Certificate, a special badge placed on the article itself denoting it as a competition winner, a profile badge that will show that they are a competition winner, and a choice of one prize from our prize pool (more prizes to come!). Monthly Theme Starting in May 2013 we will have a monthly theme for the article contest. This contest will be a second special competition between articles that match the theme. Upcoming themes will be announced soon.. The theme for the month of May is: Remake the Classics Remake either all or some element of an old video game. You can either stay true to the classic or present a new modern take on the look or even the game mechanics (add reverse time capabilities to a Mario Brothers like game and explain how you did it). You don't need to make a full video game here for the article but do need to write up a little article that puts a magnifying glass on at least part of what you did. Example of new twist on a platformer game: Reverse time effect from Braid More examples: 2d Maze Navigation Pacman Enemy AI Building a side scroller shooter Building a platformer How to do Parallax Scrolling (show both camera-based parallax as well as using shifting offsets for various layers) How to make game like xyz (where xyz is pong, snakes, asteroids, qbert, mario brothers, etc etc) Particle Engines How to create pixel art 2D Collision detection Building an Animated Starfield (Including Stars, Nebulas, Planets) Tile-based Collision Detection Various graphics effects explained (perhaps with shader code included on some platform) e.g. Glow, Bloom, Depth of Field, Old Film effect Prize Sponsors We need to thank the following sponsors who have graciously donated either money, physical prizes or fully licensed products for our prize pool. We recommend that you check out their websites and products and return the favor. If you are a potential sponsor interested in donating a prize in exchange for listing here, please contact support@gamedev.net with an idea of what you would like to offer as a prize for our members. Spine: 2D Skeletal Animation for Games Spine replaces traditional raster animation in games, providing smoother animations that are easier to produce. Animations can be created without needing more art and are so tiny that games can make extensive use of them. Bring your games to life today! Your Product Name Here Interested in being a prize sponsor? Please contact support@gamedev.net with an idea of what you would like to offer as a prize for our members. Who is Eligible? This competition is open to all members including moderators and staff members. Articles must be posted between the first and last day of the month and will be counted towards that month's competition. For this first competition ALL articles posted during the month of March will be eligible for the April competition. How to Enter Check out our article on How to Publish on GameDev.net for information on how to get started. Note that our contest is only open to those whose local laws allow participation. Our judging decisions are final and we reserve the right to substitute prizes at any time. For physical items Gamedev.net will pay delivery costs up to $25. Excess shipping charges will be the responsibility of the winner. Prize substitutions may be made as an alternative arrangement. In locations where taxes and/or duty charges are imposed on shipped items, it will also be the reponsibility of the winner to pay such charges. Winners To be announced! Home » Home » Contests English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy