Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Categories Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Categories Technical 1317 articles Subcategories Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015  Taking a look at the problem of shader cross compilation and introducing a solution which utilizes a purely text based approach. Creative 289 articles Subcategories Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts The Good, The Bad and The WebGL-y May 16 2015  To code or not to code, that is the question, at least when it comes to WebGL. In this article, I will give a quick look at three top contenders to make WebGL work for you. Some is good, some is bad, but make no mistake, it's all WebGL. Business 372 articles Subcategories Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015  Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. Reviews 8 articles Free to play Finger VS Guns now available on Android Jan 23 2015  Canadian indie game developer launches sequel free to play Finger VS Guns for android phones and tablets. GameDev.net Soapbox 13 articles Are You Letting Others In? Feb 06 2015  Are you missing out on a better quality of work by refusing to collaborate with others more often? Gamedev.net Help 26 articles Opening Up Advertising to the Community Nov 02 2014  November through December we will be trying an experiment to see if we can sustain the site through community-based advertising. Help support us by obtaining a GDNet+ membership! Closed Articles 43 articles sdv dds vs Dec 06 2014  vsdvsdvsd Home » Home » Articles » Categories English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy