Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» XRay Unreal Engine 4.5 source code Published in Game Programming By CoderGears Team - With the source code released, take a look at some of the implementations behind the awesome graphical power of the Unreal engine Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] Published in Game Programming By David Xicota - Picture this. You’ve fought hard to release your game, you get many downloads, BUT players get tangled up in level #8 and can’t get past it. Accord... Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing Published in Business and Law By Craig Edwards - Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 4Likes Dislike XRay Unreal Engine 4.5 source code UNDER REVIEW May 14 2015 05:50 PM | Posted By CoderGears Team in Game Programming With the source code released, take a look at some of the implementations behind the awesome graphical power of the Unreal engine Tagged With:  c++  unrealengine  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 14 2015 10:48 AM | Posted By David Xicota in Game Programming Picture this. You’ve fought hard to release your game, you get many downloads, BUT players get tangled up in level #8 and can’t get past it. According to analytics, they seemed to enjoy the game so far, but now they log in at lower rates. What's going on? Tagged With:  server scripts  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 09 2015 11:58 AM | Posted By Craig Edwards in Business and Law Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. Tagged With:  code signing  signing  encryption  digital signatures  security  distribution  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Building a First-Person Shooter Part 1.2: The Player Class May 08 2015 06:15 AM | Posted By Chris Vossen in Game Programming In this tutorial we will begin to flesh out our player class by adding in a camera and setting up character physics. Tagged With:  leadwerks  c++  fps  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Building a First-Person Shooter Part 1.1: Visual Studio Setup May 08 2015 06:14 AM | Posted By Chris Vossen in Game Programming This is the second lesson in a set of tutorials that demonstrate how to build a complete first-person shooter game, from start to finish. In this lesson we will use Visual Studios C++ along with Leadwerks 3 to setup our code base. Tagged With:  leadwerks  visual studio  tutorial  fps  c++  lua  native code  design  mobile  ios  android  pc  mac  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike The Top 10 Languages for Localizing Your Mobile Game May 07 2015 05:43 PM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management App Annie has provided useful data that gives insights into the breakdown of revenues between platforms and countries. After reading this article you'll have an idea of the countries you want to localize your game for Tagged With:  localization  mobile games  App Annie  languages  translation  revenue  statistic  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Why Do Mobile Games Often Fail at International Expansion? May 03 2015 06:50 AM | Posted By Vincent Chan in Mobile Development Many mobile games can benefit from international distribution, but many are unsuccessful. With these tips you'll have a better chance to succeed. Tagged With:  mobile  internationalization  localization  translation  distribution  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike When do videos need voiceovers? Apr 30 2015 09:19 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Music and Sound Our thoughts about when videos for games need voiceovers, and when they don’t. There are important pluses and minuses we think everyone should be aware of Tagged With:  Videos  Voiceovers  Mobile Games  Trailers  Sound  Voice  Games  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 30 2015 01:14 AM | Posted By Kirill Bazhenov in Graphics Programming and Theory This article covers a method that allows you to render millions of unique objects with Direct3D11 or OpenGL 4+ with minimal CPU overhead. Rendering objects this way is very close to DX12/Mantle/Vulkan performance. Tagged With:  d3d11  azdo  next-gen  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 28 2015 12:32 AM | Posted By Yowan Langlais in Business and Law Yowan describes the experience of demonstrating a game at PAX East. Tagged With:  marketing  conference  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler Apr 27 2015 08:52 AM | Posted By Apostol Dadachev in APIs and Tools Taking a look at the problem of shader cross compilation and introducing a solution which utilizes a purely text based approach. Tagged With:  shadertools  DirectX  OpenGL  HLSL  GLSL  C++  graphics  parser  programming  cross-platform  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Automata, Virtual Machines and Compilers Apr 27 2015 08:48 AM | Posted By Vilem Otte in General Programming Have you ever wanted to find magic behind the actual computation inside your computer? How are compilers made? What is assembler and disassembler? How to make your own scripting language?Then the following article explains basics in theory and implementation behind this! Tagged With:  C++  Scripting  Compilers  Automata  Interpreter  VM  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 17 2015 05:24 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in APIs and Tools Pain-free localization is the dream of everyone who develops software for foreign markets. It's a true story about a tool that makes the localization process almost magic! Tagged With:  localization  translation  cloud technology  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Tips for Designing and Developing Free-to-Play Games Apr 15 2015 07:59 PM | Posted By Jose Maria Martinez, 'Hafo' in Game Design This article shows some tips on how to make your HTML5 F2P games attractive so you can monetize them via ads, the purchase of virtual goods or any other way. This article is oriented to people who knows what free-to-play games are and also have played 'Flappy Bird' more than once. Tagged With:  tips  design  f2p  free-to-play  free to play  monetize  monetise  game loop  game design  p2p  virtual goods  monetization  pay to play  powerups  power ups  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 06:53 PM | Posted By Craig Edwards in APIs and Tools Learn how to bundle your game in an installer with very little effort, to sign your installer with a digital signature, and automatically upload your game to your website. Tagged With:  inno setup  installer  uninstall  code signing  uploading  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Arcade Machines and Gaming Library Pigaco - Devlog #0: Introduction & Architecture UNDER REVIEW Apr 08 2015 08:34 AM | Posted By Max Heisinger in APIs and Tools An introduction to a project which tries to make development of arcade games easier and to streamline building and providing arcade gaming machines. Tagged With:  diy  console  selfmade  selfbuilt  game  gaming  arcade  retro  shared  memory  piga  pigaco  boost  architecture  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Cache And How To Work For It UNDER REVIEW Apr 06 2015 11:42 AM | Posted By Joshua Waring in General Programming programming and storing data in a cache-friendly manner is imperative to performance improvements and, in turn, a reduction in power consumption Tagged With:  CPU  performance  cache  memory  access  optimisation  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games (Part 3) Apr 02 2015 10:08 AM | Posted By Andy Savage in Mobile Development Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games. This week covering conversion for in app purchases. Tagged With:  analytics  game balance  mobile  indie  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Creating a Movement Component for an RTS in UE4 UNDER REVIEW Apr 02 2015 08:56 AM | Posted By Dmitry Terekhov in Game Programming having just finished refactoring a movement component for spaceships, the author discusses Navigation Volumes, Movement component, AIController and Pawn Tagged With:  unreal engine 4  c++  movement  starfalltactics  ue4  how-to  pathfinding  network  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike How to Pitch Angry Birds, If It Were an Unknown Indie Game Mar 20 2015 11:10 AM | Posted By Drew Giovannoli in Business and Law At the Red Fox Clan, we thought it would be fun to pretend that Angry Birds was still an unknown indie game as a template for how you can promote your game. We’re specifically going to write a pitch that would be emailed to reporters online. Tagged With:  How to  game review  pitch  game promotion  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike How to check that a player's PC meets your requirements Mar 20 2015 01:47 AM | Posted By Craig Edwards in Game Programming You've created the next call of duty. In excitement, someone downloads your game and starts it. If their PC isn't the latest and greatest, are they met with a cryptic error message or crash, or something nicer? Read this article to find out how to do it the right way. Tagged With:  system requirements  specifications  hardware detection  Read More » | 17 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Substance Painter Review UNDER REVIEW Mar 16 2015 10:43 AM | Posted By Kelly L. Murdock in Visual Arts Take a look at this different approach to adding details to a model, not through texturing but by actually painting materials onto the model Tagged With:  review  texture  3d modeling  materials  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike My GDC virginity: Of indie loserdom, hope and friendship. Mar 12 2015 04:32 AM | Posted By Peter Cardwell-Gardner in Event Coverage Indie developer Peter Cardwell-Gardner details his experiences of his first GDC. A tale of woe trying to pimp a failing Kickstarter for the music game, Cadence – and finding loving friendships in unexpected places. Tagged With:  gdc  conferences  Cadence  kickstarter  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 3) - Forged in Steel... Mar 04 2015 03:02 PM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article, I take a look at Warcraft II and Starcraft, the "second age" of RTS. Tagged With:  Design  Retro  RTS  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Postmortem: "Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival", a game for learning languages Feb 24 2015 08:51 PM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Production and Management Our game “Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival” has just been released for the first target platform. I decided to write up this postmortem without knowing sales numbers and without being able to share details about marketing on different platforms as “the story so far”. Tagged With:  postmortem  html5  cordova  phonegap  canvas  mobile  tablets  hidden object game  educational  javascript  postmortem  Read More » | 2 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy