Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » Game Programming Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Game Programming Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» XRay Unreal Engine 4.5 source code Published in Game Programming By CoderGears Team - With the source code released, take a look at some of the implementations behind the awesome graphical power of the Unreal engine Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] Published in Game Programming By David Xicota - Picture this. You’ve fought hard to release your game, you get many downloads, BUT players get tangled up in level #8 and can’t get past it. Accord... Building a First-Person Shooter Part 1.2: The Player Class Published in Game Programming By Chris Vossen - In this tutorial we will begin to flesh out our player class by adding in a camera and setting up character physics. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 4Likes Dislike XRay Unreal Engine 4.5 source code UNDER REVIEW May 14 2015 05:50 PM | Posted By CoderGears Team in Game Programming With the source code released, take a look at some of the implementations behind the awesome graphical power of the Unreal engine Tagged With:  c++  unrealengine  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 14 2015 10:48 AM | Posted By David Xicota in Game Programming Picture this. You’ve fought hard to release your game, you get many downloads, BUT players get tangled up in level #8 and can’t get past it. According to analytics, they seemed to enjoy the game so far, but now they log in at lower rates. What's going on? Tagged With:  server scripts  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Building a First-Person Shooter Part 1.2: The Player Class May 08 2015 06:15 AM | Posted By Chris Vossen in Game Programming In this tutorial we will begin to flesh out our player class by adding in a camera and setting up character physics. Tagged With:  leadwerks  c++  fps  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Building a First-Person Shooter Part 1.1: Visual Studio Setup May 08 2015 06:14 AM | Posted By Chris Vossen in Game Programming This is the second lesson in a set of tutorials that demonstrate how to build a complete first-person shooter game, from start to finish. In this lesson we will use Visual Studios C++ along with Leadwerks 3 to setup our code base. Tagged With:  leadwerks  visual studio  tutorial  fps  c++  lua  native code  design  mobile  ios  android  pc  mac  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Creating a Movement Component for an RTS in UE4 UNDER REVIEW Apr 02 2015 08:56 AM | Posted By Dmitry Terekhov in Game Programming having just finished refactoring a movement component for spaceships, the author discusses Navigation Volumes, Movement component, AIController and Pawn Tagged With:  unreal engine 4  c++  movement  starfalltactics  ue4  how-to  pathfinding  network  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike How to check that a player's PC meets your requirements Mar 20 2015 01:47 AM | Posted By Craig Edwards in Game Programming You've created the next call of duty. In excitement, someone downloads your game and starts it. If their PC isn't the latest and greatest, are they met with a cryptic error message or crash, or something nicer? Read this article to find out how to do it the right way. Tagged With:  system requirements  specifications  hardware detection  Read More » | 17 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Visual Tools For Debugging Games Feb 10 2015 07:03 AM | Posted By James Wucher in Game Programming How much of your time do you spend writing code? How much of your time you spend fixing code?Which would you rather be doing? This is a no-brainer, right? Tagged With:  game  game programming  debug  video game  2D  code  bug  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike 10 Tips From Global Game Jam 2015 UNDER REVIEW Feb 04 2015 08:06 PM | Posted By Tobiasz Siemiński in Game Programming Read about how to prepare for the Global Game Jam and others! Tagged With:  ggj  game jam  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike A Room With A View Jan 21 2015 09:09 AM | Posted By James Wucher in Game Programming Instead of building a side-scrolling parallax 2-D world, build a massive any-direction-scrolling world and only let the player see a small part of it. Tagged With:  2D  viewports  game  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike How to Create a Scoreboard for Lives, Time, and Points in HTML5 with WiMi5 Dec 08 2014 02:57 AM | Posted By Jose Maria Martinez in Game Programming This tutorial gives a step-by-step explanation on how to create a scoreboard that shows the number of lives, the time, or the points obtained in a video game. You can clone a HTML5 example project in the WiMi5 Dashboard, in www.wimi5.com. Tagged With:  score  scoreboard  lives  time  point  board  html5  create  visual  script  visual script  game  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Throwing a Winning Pass UNDER REVIEW Nov 07 2014 02:21 PM | Posted By James Wucher in Game Programming Whether it is your quarterback looking for the receiver to throw to or a tank turning to atomize the enemy, figuring out how to lead the target when your launcher has to turn is some tricky business. Tagged With:  2D  physics  intercept  target  algorithm  catch  throw  tank  football  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Ultimate Input Manager for Unity UNDER REVIEW Oct 30 2014 02:09 PM | Posted By Alex Winx in Game Programming Ultimate Unity Input Manager. Tame the controllers diversity beast. Minimal code that supports even devices that aren't planned to work on designated systems Tagged With:  Input  Unity  Mapper  Manager  Joystick  Gamepad  XBox  Wii  Wiimote  Nunchuk  C#  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Creating a Very Simple GUI System for Small Games - Part III Oct 19 2014 01:19 AM | Posted By Martin Prantl in Game Programming If you are writing your own game, sooner or later you will need some sort of user interface (or graphic user interface = GUI). There are some existing libraries lying around and there are a lot of discussion threads that deals with eternal problem “What GUI should I use?”. We are going to answer this question by creating our own system from scratch, this time with part III and rendering logic. Tagged With:  gui  tutorial  graphics  touch control  mouse  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Procedural Generation of Puzzle Game Levels Oct 14 2014 10:28 AM | Posted By Tomas Rychnovsky in Game Programming Description of the approach used for procedural puzzle level generation in mobile game Fruit Dating. Tagged With:  Fruit Dating  Puzzle  Procedural  Level  iOS  Android  generation  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Pre-Structure Phrases for Internationalization UNDER REVIEW Oct 06 2014 08:44 PM | Posted By Loki Ng in Game Programming Key-value pair is a commonly seen format to store phrases for translations. Things become complicated when it comes to European languages or Middle East languages. And the solution to that would be to use structural formats instead of key-value pair. Tagged With:  translation  localization  internationalization  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike A Resource Manager for Game Assets UNDER REVIEW Sep 30 2014 02:08 PM | Posted By TheItalianJob71 in Game Programming A resource manager for handling game assets in your games. Tagged With:  engine  3d  resources  assets  Read More » | 25 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Building an Open-Source, Cross-Platform 3D Game with C++, OpenGL and GLSL, from the Ground Up Sep 30 2014 02:51 AM | Posted By dimitros.be in Game Programming Aid in learning how to develop 3D games that compile on Windows and Linux, with C++, OpenGL and GLSL, with suggested reading and one single integrated and simple example code-base. Tagged With:  OpenGL  GLSL  C++  Windows  Linux  Cross-Platform  Blender  Wavefront  Read More » | 26 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 5: Dangerous World UNDER REVIEW Sep 16 2014 10:45 AM | Posted By Evgeny Rodygin in Game Programming Red-hot rocks falling from the sky and lava will become mortally dangerous for our character. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  WebGL  JavaScript  You Wont Fry Me!  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Game i18n via IME Sep 04 2014 04:31 AM | Posted By Stoyan Nikolov in Game Programming In this post I would like to describe the basics of an IME integration in a game and some of the challenges that it poses. Recently we added full IME support to our product and most of the pain points were experienced first-hand. Tagged With:  i18n  IME  GameDev  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike How Alias Templates Saved my Sanity Sep 01 2014 07:40 AM | Posted By Matt Booth in Game Programming Using typedef in C++ is a common technique for aliasing types, when you try the same with templates there are several caveats to be wary of. This article provides example issues with template typedefs and the alternatives that modern C++ provides. Tagged With:  C++  Typedef  alias  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 33Likes Dislike Procedural Level Generation for a 2D Platformer Sep 01 2014 07:38 AM | Posted By Fabien Benoit-Koch in Game Programming Procedurally generating every element of a level for a 2d platformer is rarely discussed -- Fabien details his entire approach. Tagged With:  procedural  level generation  2d  platformer  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Basic OpenAL sound manager for your project Aug 26 2014 08:14 AM | Posted By Martin Prantl in Game Programming Adding sound to your project can be a terrifying experience. You have to find the right library, right sound format and also put it all together. This tutorial is designed to be simple and yet a little robust. You can find full code attached to article as well, so you can learn directly from it. Tagged With:  sound  openal  manager  c++  tutorial  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Anatomy of an Idle Game - A Starters Guide to AngularJS UNDER REVIEW Aug 06 2014 07:34 PM | Posted By Alexander Ballard in Game Programming Ever wanted to make your own idle/increment game? Or maybe you have been trying to get into Single Page Application development and didn't know where to start. If so, this might just be the article for you. Tagged With:  Beginner  AngularJS  Idle Game  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 19Likes Dislike Abusing the Linker to Minimize Compilation Time Jul 15 2014 04:21 PM | Posted By Tom Roe in Game Programming Constantly recompiling a mountain of files because a single file has too many compile-time dependencies? Move the dependencies to link-time and minimize compilation time! Tagged With:  compiler  linker  context  c++  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Haskell Game Object Design - Or How Functions Can Get You Apples Jul 02 2014 05:52 AM | Posted By Marc Sunet in Game Programming This tutorial shows how to model game objects in Haskell using closures to dodge the everyday use of subtyping and dynamic dispatch in object-oriented languages. Tagged With:  haskell  game object  design  subtyping  Read More » | 5 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » Game Programming English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy