Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » General Programming Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! General Programming Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Automata, Virtual Machines and Compilers Published in General Programming By Vilem Otte - Have you ever wanted to find magic behind the actual computation inside your computer? How are compilers made? What is assembler and disassembler?... Cache And How To Work For It Published in General Programming By Joshua Waring - programming and storing data in a cache-friendly manner is imperative to performance improvements and, in turn, a reduction in power consumption Debugging - "Follow The Data" Published in General Programming By Bruce J. Veazie - Programmers may be unaware that, with the proper approach, debugging problems on their own can save time, and result in valuable self-education. An... View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 8Likes Dislike Automata, Virtual Machines and Compilers Apr 27 2015 08:48 AM | Posted By Vilem Otte in General Programming Have you ever wanted to find magic behind the actual computation inside your computer? How are compilers made? What is assembler and disassembler? How to make your own scripting language?Then the following article explains basics in theory and implementation behind this! Tagged With:  C++  Scripting  Compilers  Automata  Interpreter  VM  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Cache And How To Work For It UNDER REVIEW Apr 06 2015 11:42 AM | Posted By Joshua Waring in General Programming programming and storing data in a cache-friendly manner is imperative to performance improvements and, in turn, a reduction in power consumption Tagged With:  CPU  performance  cache  memory  access  optimisation  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Debugging - "Follow The Data" Feb 18 2015 11:54 AM | Posted By Bruce J. Veazie in General Programming Programmers may be unaware that, with the proper approach, debugging problems on their own can save time, and result in valuable self-education. An approach to debugging I call "Follow The Data" can do just that. Tagged With:  debugging  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Multi-threaded Keyboard Input for Fixed-Time-Step Games UNDER REVIEW Jan 16 2015 11:07 AM | Posted By Irlan Robson in General Programming How to handle input in fixe-time step games. Tagged With:  time  input  game  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Implementing a Meta System in C++ Nov 19 2014 04:47 PM | Posted By Artem Shal in General Programming Implementing a meta system to support several scripting languages with interoperability. Tagged With:  c++  templates  meta system  reflection  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Pre-Visualization Is Important! Oct 28 2014 09:43 PM | Posted By superman3275 in General Programming Many a beginner on gamedev.net (including me) has trouble with their software in the beginning. I had no idea how to plan for projects or what was even included in projects. I would look for posts about how to plan out projects. This article presents an approach a beginner can use for organizing their project. Tagged With:  program  organization  design  visualization  planning  beginner  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Introduction to Software Optimization Aug 20 2014 11:17 PM | Posted By Bartlomiej Filipek in General Programming Takes you through the process and goes over the various techniques to optimizing your code Tagged With:  optimization  gamedev  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 26Likes Dislike Using Varadic Templates for a Signals and Slots Implementation in C++ Aug 17 2014 06:07 AM | Posted By Paul Cook (Aardvajk) in General Programming Varadic templates allow for signals and slots systems to be implemented in an elegant and concise manner and are a good example of how the power of varadic templates can be used to simplify generic systems that were previously difficult to express. Tagged With:  C++  signals and slots  varadic templates  Read More » | 20 Comments Like 31Likes Dislike What Language Do I Use? Jul 29 2014 11:32 PM | Posted By John Hattan in General Programming This article will cover some of the languages that are popular with game programmers. This list is neither complete nor deep. This article is intended to give you a bird's eye view of the most popular game development languages out there along with a short overview and a few situations where they would be a good or a poor choice for a project. Tagged With:  c lang  d language  c++  java  c#  .net  assembly  asm  vb  visual basic  flash  actionscript  python  php  asp.net  ruby on rails  javascript  objective c  Read More » | 36 Comments Like 29Likes Dislike Modern Garbage Collectors under the Hood Jul 02 2014 05:36 AM | Posted By Bluefirehawk in General Programming More and more Applications are written in a language that manages its memory with a Garbage Collector, since that is what the cool kids are doing now. But weirdly, even experienced programmers seem to have a distorted image of the good and bad sides of the Garbage Collector. In this Article, I try to show how modern Garbage Collector work and discuss some common misconceptions. Tagged With:  garbage collection  memory management  tutorial  c++  Read More » | 19 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike How to Handle Circular Dependencies with Templates in C++ Jan 16 2014 11:10 AM | Posted By Kent Fagerjord in General Programming This is a problem I encountered while tuning the Message-Component-Entity system in our game under development while using C++ templates Tagged With:  c++  templates  circular dependency  entity  component  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 34Likes Dislike Writing Fast Code: Introduction To Algorithms and Big-O Nov 29 2013 06:07 PM | Posted By Arian Allenson M. Valdez in General Programming Ever wondered what makes code fast? Here we take a look at different algorithms, their running time, and Big-O. Tagged With:  fast code  algorithm  big-o  Read More » | 29 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike Grounded Pointers Sep 13 2013 09:10 AM | Posted By Andrey Karpov in General Programming Our ex-colleague is sincerely worried about the quality of the code he deals with in his new job, leading him to write a paper on ways you shouldn't write programs Tagged With:  c++  swamp  static analysis  Read More » | 25 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Design Considerations for Custom Binary Formats and Data Compression (Part 1) UNDER REVIEW Sep 06 2013 09:54 AM | Posted By Brendan G Bohannon in General Programming While often there are general purpose file-formats or data representations to achieve a goal, sometimes it may make sense to create something a little more specialized, in cases where encoded size may be significant. Tagged With:  file formats  data compression  entropy coding  huffman coding  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Useless Snippet #2: AABB/Frustum test Sep 04 2013 11:47 PM | Posted By Jim Drygiannakis in General Programming How fast can a batch of Axis Aligned Bounding Boxes (AABB) be culled by a frustum? Tagged With:  aabb  frustum  culling  sse  snippet  Read More » | 14 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike How I Created My Single Threaded Event System UNDER REVIEW Aug 26 2013 12:25 PM | Posted By Will Song in General Programming A walkthrough of how I implemented an event system I wrote. Tagged With:  events  threads  c++  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike Wade Not In Unknown Waters: Part One Aug 26 2013 02:08 AM | Posted By Andrey Karpov in General Programming We decided to write several small posts on how C/C++ programmers play with fire without knowing it. The first post will be devoted to an attempt to explicitly call a constructor. Tagged With:  c++  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Cross Platform Test Driven Development Environment Using CMake (Part 5) Aug 19 2013 01:21 PM | Posted By AllEightUp in General Programming CMake 2.8.11 is a game changer. A large portion of the prior 4 articles has just been deprecated and it is time to learn why. Tagged With:  make  cmake  cross platform  makefile  c++  c++11  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Why Is It Building So Long? Aug 17 2013 12:40 AM | Posted By Bartłomiej Filipek in General Programming How to use the concept of "insulation" to reduce compile times for large software projects Tagged With:  oop  encapsulation  c++  insulation  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Advanced Python Part One: List Comprehensions Aug 16 2013 01:41 PM | Posted By Thomas Hobohm in General Programming Python List Comprehensions are a small tool with a large use case. They get rid of the tedious loops required for tasks such as list / string manipulation in Python in an elegant and easy way. Tagged With:  advanced python  python  python2  python3  list comprehensions  lists  programming  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Data Structures for Pre-College Programmers: Choosing The Right Structure Aug 13 2013 09:29 AM | Posted By Bryan Wagstaff (frob) in General Programming This is part of a series of articles dealing with data structures for beginners. It covers choosing between the various data structures. Read More » | 3 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike How About UNICODE and UTF-8 Aug 06 2013 04:07 PM | Posted By Dominque A Douglas in General Programming Determining how to represent text can get a bit complicated once you start to get past the ASCII and the Latin alphabet. This article will examine UNICODE's UTF-8 encoding and how it can help. Read More » | 21 Comments Like 21Likes Dislike The Programming Primer Aug 06 2013 03:54 PM | Posted By Dan Mayor in General Programming This article covers some basic programming theory that should help beginner level programmers to better understand what it is that programming is all about and what they are getting themselves into. Tagged With:  programming  function  method  class  data type  variable  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike D Exceptions and C Callbacks UNDER REVIEW Aug 06 2013 07:30 AM | Posted By Mike "Aldacron" Parker in General Programming D is often used in conjunction with C libraries, but there are certain potential issues to be aware of. Exception handling is one of them. Tagged With:  d language  exception  callback  glfw  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Getting Started with the D Programming Language Jul 28 2013 10:53 AM | Posted By Mike "Aldacron" Parker in General Programming A few tips about getting up and running with the D Programming Language. My way. Tagged With:  d language  windows  derelict 3  Read More » | 7 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » General Programming English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy