Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » DirectX and XNA Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! DirectX and XNA Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Animating Characters with DirectX Published in DirectX and XNA By Douglas MacLeod - A tutorial on using Direct3D 9 to load and animate skeleton-based character meshes. Includes an introduction to setting up DirectX and Win32 applic... Visual Studio Graphics Content Pipeline for C# Projects Published in DirectX and XNA By Justin Stenning - In this article we will look at how to use the graphics content pipeline for C# in both Visual Studio 2012 and Visual Studio 2013 for Desktop and W... DirectX Graphics Diagnostic Published in DirectX and XNA By Pooya Eimandar - In this article by Pooya Eimandar, we will be introduced to DirectX graphics diagnostic with Visual Studio 2012 and DirectX 11.1. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 17Likes Dislike Animating Characters with DirectX Apr 22 2014 06:38 PM | Posted By Douglas MacLeod in DirectX and XNA A tutorial on using Direct3D 9 to load and animate skeleton-based character meshes. Includes an introduction to setting up DirectX and Win32 applications Tagged With:  directx  animation  characters  skinning  direct  3d  tutorial  hlsl  hierarchy  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Visual Studio Graphics Content Pipeline for C# Projects Mar 24 2014 06:47 AM | Posted By Justin Stenning in DirectX and XNA In this article we will look at how to use the graphics content pipeline for C# in both Visual Studio 2012 and Visual Studio 2013 for Desktop and Windows Store apps. Tagged With:  d3d11  sharpdx  c#  vs2012  vs2013  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike DirectX Graphics Diagnostic Oct 11 2013 12:50 AM | Posted By Pooya Eimandar in DirectX and XNA In this article by Pooya Eimandar, we will be introduced to DirectX graphics diagnostic with Visual Studio 2012 and DirectX 11.1. Tagged With:  dx11  directx  gpu  visual studio  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 22Likes Dislike D3D11 Tessellation In Depth Aug 13 2013 02:02 AM | Posted By Seth Hoffert in DirectX and XNA Learn more about the D3D11 tessellation pipeline, including how to take advantage of the two new hull and domain shader stages Tagged With:  d3d  d3d11  tessellation  intermediate  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike DirectX 11 C++ Game Camera Aug 08 2013 09:43 AM | Posted By Pavel Zinov in DirectX and XNA In this tutorial, I will show how to create your own 3D game camera. We will also discuss various camera transitions in order to make our camera dynamic. I assume that reader have a basic knowledge about vectors and points in 3D space and difference between them. To understand the code snippet at the end of the article, you must have a basic C++ knowledge. Tagged With:  DirectX11  Camera  Crossbones  Article  For Beginners  Tutorial  3D  Game  C++  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Pixel perfect collision detection in DirectX Jul 24 2013 04:07 PM | Posted By Esteban in DirectX and XNA The basic collision detection system everyone starts with is bounding box collision detection, but this method can be a bit inaccurate; however we will take advantage of it in this article.The basic idea is to check first, if bounding box collision detection has occurred, and then check pixel by pixel if the collision trully took place: check bounding box collisions if they exist, take a look p... Tagged With:  pixel  perfect  collision  detection  DirectX  lockrect  alpha  c++  2d  physics  LPDIRECT3DTEXTURE9  IntersectRect  sprite  texture  D3DLOCKED_RECT  RECT  direct3d  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Using Animated Pieces in a Board-based Game with XNA 4.0 Feb 24 2012 10:29 PM | Posted By Kurt Jaegers in DirectX and XNA This article by Kurt Jaegers, author of XNA 4.0 Game Development by Example: Beginner's Guide, enhances a board-based puzzle game called Flood Control in XNA 4.0 using animation. In this article, we will cover:Animating the rotation of pieces when manipulated by the playerGradually fading out pieces of completed scoring chainsAnimating the falling of pieces into place on the boardAll of the... Tagged With:  piece  class  pieces  gameboard  method  add  animated  gamepiece  new  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike 3D Animation Techniques with XNA Game Studio 4.0 Feb 23 2012 02:33 PM | Posted By Sean James in DirectX and XNA In this article, we will look at several ways to make the objects in our scene move. First, we will look at the animation of objects as a whole. We will do this through simple linear interpolation between start and end values, and through a more complex curve interpolation. We will also look at more complex animations through keyframed animation.This article by Sean James, author of 3D Graphics... Tagged With:  frames  position  new  timespan  rotation  vector3  mathhelper  vector3(0  add(new  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Building a Complete Board-based Puzzle Game with Microsoft XNA 4.0 Feb 01 2012 11:49 AM | Posted By Kurt Jaegers in DirectX and XNA This article by Kurt Jaegers, author of XNA 4.0 Game Development by Example: Beginner's Guide, introduces a board-based puzzle game called Flood Control. We introduce the XNA Content Pipeline, and build a recursive function to determine the state of the game board while playing.This article focuses on the following concepts:Using the Content Pipeline to load textures from diskCreating class... Tagged With:  gamepiece  class  game  pieces  piece  public  code  board  piecetype  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Getting Started with XNA Game Studio Development Jan 11 2012 11:24 AM | Posted By Microsoft in DirectX and XNA microsoft.com — XNA Game Studio is an integrated development environment designed to make it easier to develop games for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, and Windows Phone. XNA Game Studio extends Microsoft Visual Studio with support for the XNA Framework and tools. The XNA Framework is a managed-code class library that contains features targeted specifically at game development. In addition, XNA Game Studio inclu... Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike XNA 4.0 Beginner Tutorials - Breakout Jan 11 2012 12:28 AM | Posted By Jamie McMahon in DirectX and XNA xnagpa.net — I'm writing these tutorials for the new XNA 4.0 framework. The tutorials will make more sense if they are read in order. You can find the list of tutorials on the XNA 4.0 Tutorials page of my web site. I will be making my version of the project available for download at the end of each tutorial. It will be included on the page that links to the tutorials. This is a beginner tutorial on cre... Read More » | 0 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike DigitalRune 3D .NET and XNA Game Engine Dec 29 2011 04:47 AM | Posted By roverstu in DirectX and XNA digitalrune.com — The DigitalRune Engine empowers professional .NET developers, indie developers and hobbyists to create 3D games and simulations using cutting-edge technology. The complete game engine is written in managed code and took several man-years to implement and optimize. Read More » | 0 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike App Hub - content catalog Dec 29 2011 03:40 AM | Posted By roverstu in DirectX and XNA msdn.com — Get free game code you can reuse. Read More » | 0 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Designing a Flexible Vertex Element System for XNA Using Attributes Dec 02 2008 03:17 AM | Posted By Michael Popoloski in DirectX and XNA IntroductionAnyone who’s done 3D graphics work with DirectX or XNA has undoubtedly had to learn about the concept of vertex formats. All vertex data passed to the graphics card needs to be described in order for the data it contains to be used correctly, and each graphics API has slightly different ways of doing so. In the past, when programmable shaders were not a factor, DirectX used a system... Tagged With:  vertex  data  system  element  structure  new  code  elements  public  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Hosting a C++ D3D engine in C# Winforms Jun 17 2008 05:11 AM | Posted By Ryan Villamil in DirectX and XNA Motivation So you have invested man-years of effort in your C++ D3D graphics/visualization/game engine. Now you want to build a nice GUI that utilizes this engine, such as a scene editor or modeler, but low and behold you are inundated by potential hosting solutions: MFC, wxWidgets, QT, Winforms, WPF. All with different challenges and subtleties.Back in the day I solved this problem with MFC... Tagged With:  class  hresult  hwnd  dll  code  winforms  c++/cli  application  virtual  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike 2D in Direct3D using Textured Quads Jul 31 2003 04:31 PM | Posted By Eamonn Doherty in DirectX and XNA This article is for people trying to make a 2D graphics engine using Direct3D 9. It assumes you already have a basic Direct3D 9 application up and running, possibly using ID3DXSprite functions.If you do not, the code for a fully working application using the methods presented in this article is included.This article is divded into the following sections:The conceptThe vertex formatInitializatio... Tagged With:  texture  vertices  rorigin  vertex  buffervertices  textures  colour  loaded  quad  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike DirectDraw Programming Tutorial Aug 06 1999 09:46 PM | Posted By Lan Mader in DirectX and XNA ContentsOverview of DirectDrawDirectX API groupsWhat is Direct DrawRelationship to WinGDirectDraw surfaces - how you access video memoryThe page flipping approach to animationDirectDraw and COMDirectDraw ProgrammingWhat you need to compile and linkInitializing DirectDrawCreating the primary surface and setting up for page flippingLoading a bitmap into video memoryLoading the paletteColor Keying... Tagged With:  directdraw  surface  video  memory  ddrval  bitmap  ddsd  create  primary  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » DirectX and XNA English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy