Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » Artificial Intelligence Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Artificial Intelligence Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Making Machines Learn Published in Artificial Intelligence By Jean-René Couture - What if the system could reproduce the learning patterns of the human player: starting inexperienced and, by being thought by actions, how to play... Generalized Platformer AI Pathfinding Published in Artificial Intelligence By Chris F. Brown (Zamaster, DotStarMoney) - In this article, we'll explore a powerful, general technique to guiding "jump and run" style AI through a platforming course to reach a... Dynamic Pathfinding Published in Artificial Intelligence By James Wucher - Mash up your physics engine and your pathfinding engine and what do you get? Dynamic obstacle avoidance. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 14Likes Dislike Making Machines Learn Jan 19 2015 01:41 PM | Posted By Jean-René Couture in Artificial Intelligence What if the system could reproduce the learning patterns of the human player: starting inexperienced and, by being thought by actions, how to play better? After all, playing a game is reproducing simple patterns in an always more complex set of situations, something computers are made to do. What would it mean to make the system learn how to play better, as it's playing? Tagged With:  AI  Personality  Emotions  Design  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Generalized Platformer AI Pathfinding Dec 06 2014 12:55 AM | Posted By Chris F. Brown (Zamaster, DotStarMoney) in Artificial Intelligence In this article, we'll explore a powerful, general technique to guiding "jump and run" style AI through a platforming course to reach an arbitrary destination. This method works with both static geometry and moving level elements, like elevators or wheels. Tagged With:  AI  pathfinding  platformer  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Dynamic Pathfinding UNDER REVIEW Nov 04 2014 02:13 PM | Posted By James Wucher in Artificial Intelligence Mash up your physics engine and your pathfinding engine and what do you get? Dynamic obstacle avoidance. Tagged With:  pathfinding  2D  AI  physics  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Dijkstra's Algorithm - Shortest Path Oct 21 2014 02:45 AM | Posted By Erik Hazzard in Artificial Intelligence This post will cover the basics of Dijksta's shortest path algorithm and how it can apply to path finding for game development. It is my opinion that understanding this algorithm will aid in understanding more complex AI algorithms, such as A*. This post is aimed more towards developers starting out in game development or those curious about Dijkstra's algorithm, but this will be a some... Tagged With:  dijkstra  shortest path  pathfinding  spf  dijkstras algorithm  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Graphs and Pathfinding UNDER REVIEW Aug 13 2014 08:43 AM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Artificial Intelligence Jorge returns with another series of his popular YouTube videos, covering AI techniques to make your agents smarter about moving around your game world Tagged With:  math  ai  pathfinding  graphs  breadth first search  dijkstra  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Path Finding for innovative games: Navigation Jul 04 2014 07:36 AM | Posted By Giovanni Guarino in Artificial Intelligence The current main approaches to the path finding issue are good for simple and classic games, but not for innovative ones, and often cause performance and human simulation issues. A new approach that starts from the findings of the evolution psychology could help making AI models for innovative games Tagged With:  pathfinding  ai  artificial intelligence  navigation meshes  navigation grid  mental navigation  intelligent agent  dynamic avoidance  biological pathfinding  psychology  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Path Finding for innovative games: Graph Creation and Best Path Selection Apr 06 2014 07:44 AM | Posted By Giovanni Guarino in Artificial Intelligence Path Finding issues have the same models from several years: navigation meshes, navigation grid and waypoints navigation for building the graph, A*, Sample, Dijkstra as 'already classic' algorithm. The advent of a new awareness, whom states that the logical approach to simulate humans is not the best way to solve the PF issue, is bringing new freshness for the AI world. The topic of thi... Tagged With:  pathfinding  ai  artificial intelligence  navigation meshes  navigation grid  waypoint navigationm  mental navigation  intelligent agent  dynamic object avoidance  biological pathfinding  psychology  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Path Finding for Innovative Games: Object Avoidance and Smoothing Movement Mar 24 2014 06:48 AM | Posted By Giovanni Guarino in Artificial Intelligence This is the last of three articles that treat a new approach for the Path Finding. It's a part of the studies and experience I made in the last years, mainly in the fields of the Artificial Intelligence for Games and Evolutionary Psychology. Tagged With:  artificial intelligence  navigation meshes  navigation grid  waypoint navigation  mental navigation  mental map  intelligent agent  emotional agent  dynamic object avoidance  biological pathfinding  psychology  smoothing algorithm  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 27Likes Dislike Generating 2D Navmeshes Jan 08 2014 10:21 AM | Posted By Christoph Romstöck in Artificial Intelligence Here is a quick description on how to generate 2D navmeshes from the level geometry to represent the paths an actor can take to get from one place to another. Tagged With:  navmesh  pathfinding  ai  2d  clipper  poly2tri  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 26Likes Dislike Light Introduction to Genetic Programming Oct 30 2013 01:48 AM | Posted By Petter Hansson in Artificial Intelligence GP is easy to conceptually understand and reasonably simple to implement at a basic level, which is what this article is about. It also covers the included example project Tagged With:  ai  genetic programming  genetic algorithms  learning  optimization  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Smarter Steering: Using Context for Direction Aug 15 2013 01:24 PM | Posted By Mike Lewis in Artificial Intelligence Combine the power of steering and flocking models with contextual information to build a simple but powerful local navigation system. Tagged With:  ai  steering  context steering  movement  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Incorporating Search Algorithms into RTS Game Agents Oct 13 2012 04:32 AM | Posted By David Churchill and Michael Buro in Artificial Intelligence research paper from the 2012 Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment conference RTS Workshop Tagged With:  rts  agents  ai  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Fast Heuristic Search for RTS Game Combat Scenarios Oct 12 2012 04:31 AM | Posted By David Churchill and Abdallah Saffidine and Michael Buro in Artificial Intelligence research paper from the 2012 Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment conference Tagged With:  rts  heuristic  ai  research  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike A new method to speed up path finding Jan 03 2012 08:18 AM | Posted By Niu Jian in Artificial Intelligence The method is simple. Red grid is block grid,Green grid can walk. first,Pre process on map to get datas that we need: 1) The map is divided into many regions, each region consist of a number of grids, these regions must be convex polygon(int most cases,they are rectangulars), there are not block grids in these regions. 2) then generate the shortest path information between regions, such... Tagged With:  grid  region  path  regions  shortest  information  dest  source  grids  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Build-Order Optimization in StarCraft Oct 12 2011 04:26 AM | Posted By David Churchill and Michael Buro in Artificial Intelligence Academic research paper from the 2011 Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment conference Tagged With:  research  rts  optimization  optimisation  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Navigation Graph Generation Jun 28 2011 03:20 PM | Posted By Igor Borovikov in Artificial Intelligence OverviewNavigation graph remains a useful alternative to navigation mesh and may offer certain advantages depending on a game's environment. This article discusses several approaches to navigation graph generation: from an automated one based on Delaunay triangulation to a completely automatic method derived from triangulation of navigable areas and dual graph of triangulation.The article u... Tagged With:  graph  navigation  nodes  figure  node  triangulation  primitives  path  mesh  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike The Core Mechanics of Influence Mapping Jun 07 2011 10:00 PM | Posted By Alex J. Champandard in Artificial Intelligence .Influence maps have been around since the very early days of game AI, tracing their history back to real-time strategy games over a decade ago. Since then, influence maps have become a cornerstone technique for game developers, and are even starting to become prevalent in first-person shooters as well (e.g. KILLZONE 2/3). In this tutorial, you'll learn about some of the motivation fo... Tagged With:  influence  maps  map  you'  algorithm  game  grid  information  Read More » | 4 Comments Like -1Likes Dislike Vehicle Control with Neural Networks Sep 01 2003 05:34 AM | Posted By Philippe Kunzle in Artificial Intelligence AbstractUsing a neural network for the brain, we want a vehicle to drive by itself avoiding obstacles. We accomplish this by choosing the appropriate inputs/outputs and by carefully training the neural net. We feed the network with distances of the closest obstacles around the vehicle to imitate what a human driver would see. The output is the acceleration and steering of the vehicle. We also n... Tagged With:  neural network  steering  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » Artificial Intelligence English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy