Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » Math and Physics Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Math and Physics Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» PID Control of Physics Bodies Published in Math and Physics By James Wucher - Once you bite the bullet and decide to use a physics engine for your game pieces, you are going to have to come to terms with making them move natu... Capsule Inertia Tensor Published in Math and Physics By Bojan Lovrovic - This article tries to simplify the math behind calculating inertia tensor of a cylinder as much as possible without skipping on any important detai... Towards a Simpler, Stiffer, and more Stable Spring Published in Math and Physics By Michael Schmidt Nissen (h4tt3n) - In this article we will look at a modified spring equation that is very easy to tune, displays maximum possible stiffnes and damping, and is guaran... View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 12Likes Dislike PID Control of Physics Bodies Jan 26 2015 11:39 AM | Posted By James Wucher in Math and Physics Once you bite the bullet and decide to use a physics engine for your game pieces, you are going to have to come to terms with making them move naturally. Getting a handle on handling forces to make things "turn" can be a psychotic episode in the making. Instead, do what the engineers do in the real world and use a PID control loop. Tagged With:  2D  Box2D  Physics  PID  Control Loop  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Capsule Inertia Tensor Jan 11 2015 11:38 PM | Posted By Bojan Lovrovic in Math and Physics This article tries to simplify the math behind calculating inertia tensor of a cylinder as much as possible without skipping on any important details. Implementation in C/C++ is presented at the end. Tagged With:  physics  programming  math  calculus  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 18Likes Dislike Towards a Simpler, Stiffer, and more Stable Spring Dec 19 2014 01:53 AM | Posted By Michael Schmidt Nissen (h4tt3n) in Math and Physics In this article we will look at a modified spring equation that is very easy to tune, displays maximum possible stiffnes and damping, and is guaranteed to keep any spring system stable under all conditions. The equation is tailored for 1st order symplectic Euler integration and impulse based simulation. Tagged With:  spring  damping  mass-spring-damper  harmonic oscillator  reduced mass  game physics  Read More » | 16 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Shooting At Stuff Nov 15 2014 12:22 PM | Posted By James Wucher in Math and Physics You never shoot directly at a moving target. You shoot at where the target is going to be when your shot gets there. Millions of years of biology make it easy for predators. Turns out it's pretty easy for computers as well...if you know the math. Tagged With:  2d intercept position  2D  vector  target  intercept  moving target  algorithm  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Calculus Oct 10 2014 06:42 AM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics The popular series continues with applications for calculus as related to game development Tagged With:  math  calculus  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Simple but Effective Collisions Part 1: Radial Collision Handling Aug 15 2014 08:00 AM | Posted By George Kristiansen in Math and Physics Smooth collision detection is a requirement for any game, whether you're running around in an FPS or landing a spacecraft on the Moon. This article talks through the first of two methods for implementing simple collision detection for objects commonly encountered in games. It will use DirectX syntax, but it is easy enough to apply to other APIs. Tagged With:  collision detection  trees  bounding  cylinder  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Matrix Inversion using LU Decomposition Apr 25 2014 02:05 PM | Posted By Tim Bright in Math and Physics Need to solve a problem involving matrix inversion? This article is for you! Tagged With:  matrix  inversion  LU decomposition  numerical methods  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Fragment Shaders Mar 26 2014 11:45 PM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics A series of videos on the mathematics behind shaders, covering topics including normal mapping, lambertian surfaces, specularity, sprite lamp normal generation and fog Tagged With:  shaders  normal maps  lambertian surfaces  specularity  fog  sprite lamp  normals  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Making a Game Engine: Transformations Feb 15 2014 01:17 PM | Posted By James Lambert in Math and Physics Any graphical game needs a way to place objects on the screen, move them, rotate them, and even grow or shrink them. Transformation matrices offer a very elegant solution to this problem. Tagged With:  game engine  transforms  matrices  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Triangle Meshes Feb 07 2014 04:30 AM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics Math for Game Developers is exactly what it sounds like - a weekly instructional YouTube series wherein I show you how to use math to make your games. Every Thursday we'll learn how to implement one game design, starting from the underlying mathematical concept and ending with its C++ implementation. The videos will teach you everything you need to know, all you need is a basic understanding of... Read More » | 2 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Geometry Testing Jan 30 2014 08:58 AM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics Learn the math behind firing a bullet and detecting collisions in a scene with the line/box intersection algorithm Tagged With:  vector  aabb  matrices  matrix  plane intersection  line intersection  collisions  projections  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Advanced Intersection Test Methods Jan 21 2014 04:51 PM | Posted By Tim Bright in Math and Physics This advanced article on intersection tests is primarily about curve intersection, but it also contains useful information for primitive intersection tests, such as point-line, line-line, and line-circle. These can be extended to 3D primitives as well. Tagged With:  geometry  intersections  lines  plane  curves  parametric  implicit  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike Problem Solving Using Vectors Dec 23 2013 04:45 AM | Posted By James Lambert in Math and Physics Anybody who has dealt with rotating sprites probably has dealt with angles. Representing a sprite's rotation as an angle makes certain operations, such as rotating towards another angle, much more complicated than it should be. There is a better way. Use unit vectors. Tagged With:  vectors  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Practical Guide to Bezier Curves Nov 07 2013 09:05 AM | Posted By Tim Bright in Math and Physics There's a lot about the basics of Bezier curves around, but how about actually using them? This will show a few new things about Bezier curves, a few techniques in coding up curves, and serve as a primer for Bezier surfaces and B-splines. Tagged With:  math  Bezier curves  geometry  Read More » | 16 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Advanced Matrices Sep 24 2013 01:05 PM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics The popular video tutorial series continues with new videos on advanced ways to use matrices in game development Tagged With:  matrices  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 19Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Quaternions Aug 21 2013 09:10 AM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics The popular video tutorial series returns with new videos on how to use quaternions in game development Tagged With:  quaternions  axis-angle  rotation  inverse  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Advanced Vectors Aug 07 2013 02:30 PM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics These videos cover dot products, cross products, euler angles, and box intersection as applied to game problems Tagged With:  dot product  cross product  euler angles  box intersection  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 25Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Intro to Matrices Aug 05 2013 03:57 PM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics Explores various game development techniques that utilize a basic understanding of matrices Tagged With:  matrices  basis vectors  scaling  rotation  translation  inverse  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Practical Guide to Bezier Surfaces Jul 11 2013 09:40 AM | Posted By Tim Bright in Math and Physics Now that you're an expert on Bezier curves, let's throw in another dimension. As promised, here's the article on Bezier surfaces. Tagged With:  math  geometry  bezier curves  bezier surfaces  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 26Likes Dislike Math for Game Developers: Intro to Vectors Apr 26 2013 11:26 PM | Posted By Jorge "BSVino" Rodriguez in Math and Physics A series of videos that visually explains and demonstrates various math concepts applied to game development Tagged With:  video  math  vectors  cross product  dot product  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Vectors and Matrices: A Primer Apr 26 2013 07:55 AM | Posted By Phil Dadd in Math and Physics An introduction to using these mathematical equations in game development Tagged With:  vectors  matrices  math  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 21Likes Dislike Intersection Math & Algorithms - Learn to Derive Apr 17 2013 09:24 AM | Posted By Vilem Otte in Math and Physics In this stand-alone article I'm trying to explain how to derive several intersection algorithms that are very important for every game.It should teach you *how* to derive, of course math-thinking is (as always) very important! Tagged With:  algorithms  point  ray  linear algebra  vector  plane  normal  aabb  bounding box  intersection  sphere  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 29Likes Dislike Practical use of Vector Math in Games Mar 18 2013 05:15 AM | Posted By Nercury in Math and Physics At start, 3D geometry may seem daunting and invoke memories of trigonometry lessons. But it is not so bad if you know the right tools. Tagged With:  math  simulation  vector  dot product  cross product  update loop  3d  geometry  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike A Verlet based approach for 2D game physics Nov 19 2009 04:49 PM | Posted By Benedikt Bitterli in Math and Physics Illustrates the power of Verlet integration for physics simulations and covers basic 2D rigid body dynamics with collision Tagged With:  collision  distance  edge  bodies  float  vertices  collisioninfo  line  axis  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Beat Detection Algorithms Jun 07 2003 02:39 PM | Posted By Frédéric Patin in Math and Physics Disclaimer This document is to be distributed for free and without any modification from its original state. The author declines all responsibility in the damage this document or any of the things you will do with it might do to anyone or to anything. This document and any of its contents is not copyrighted and is free of all rights, you may thus use it, modify it or destroy it without breakin... Tagged With:  energy  algorithm  beat  sound  compute  frequency  beats  detection  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » Math and Physics English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy