Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » Mobile Development Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Mobile Development Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Why Do Mobile Games Often Fail at International Expansion? Published in Mobile Development By Vincent Chan - Many mobile games can benefit from international distribution, but many are unsuccessful. With these tips you'll have a better chance to succeed. Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games (Part 3) Published in Mobile Development By Andy Savage - Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games. This week covering conversion for in app purchases. Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games (Part 2) Published in Mobile Development By Andy Savage - Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games. This week covering gameplay and balance. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 8Likes Dislike Why Do Mobile Games Often Fail at International Expansion? May 03 2015 06:50 AM | Posted By Vincent Chan in Mobile Development Many mobile games can benefit from international distribution, but many are unsuccessful. With these tips you'll have a better chance to succeed. Tagged With:  mobile  internationalization  localization  translation  distribution  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games (Part 3) Apr 02 2015 10:08 AM | Posted By Andy Savage in Mobile Development Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games. This week covering conversion for in app purchases. Tagged With:  analytics  game balance  mobile  indie  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games (Part 2) Feb 05 2015 07:15 PM | Posted By Andy Savage in Mobile Development Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games. This week covering gameplay and balance. Tagged With:  analytics  game balance  mobile  indie  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Standard Gameplay and IAP Metrics for Mobile Games Jan 14 2015 06:25 AM | Posted By Andy Savage in Mobile Development Article series covering basic analytics for mobile indie games, covering standard KPIs, game balance and IAP conversions. Tagged With:  analytics  game balance  mobile  indie  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike From Python to Android Oct 29 2014 05:26 AM | Posted By Janosch Henze in Mobile Development Using the pygame subset for android allows us to easily port a game written with python and pygame to Android. Hence we are capable of developing a game in python on the PC and let it run on our favorite Android device. Tagged With:  python  android  pygame  pgs4a  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 4: Mobile Devices UNDER REVIEW Sep 03 2014 02:02 PM | Posted By Evgeny Rodygin in Mobile Development This is the fourth part of the Blend4Web gamedev tutorial. Now we will look at programming the controls for touchscreen devices. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  Blender  Game  Programming  JavaScript  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike How To Setup a BlackBerry 10 Development Environment to Build Cascades Apps UNDER REVIEW Feb 20 2014 02:35 PM | Posted By MarekKnows.com in Mobile Development A step-by-step instructional guide on how to setup a BB10 development environment. This article includes instructions for downloading all the tools, installing them, and setting them up. You will learn how to get the BB10 simulator up and running and then how to connect it up to the momentics IDE to run and test code. You'll also learn how to connect to a physical BB10 device so that you ca... Tagged With:  blackberry  cascades  bb10  ide  momentics  apps  simulator  virtual machine  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Limits of Developing a Web-Based Hidden Object Game for Learning Languages Nov 07 2013 09:01 AM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Mobile Development Earlier this year, after the game design and concept for "Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival" were almost done and funding was secured, the crucial question had to be answered: Which game engine or programming system should be used for production? We chose HTML5, with Javascript, and this article recaps our most important "lessons learned". Tagged With:  javascript  createJS  overdraw  sound  memory  mobile  tablets  canvas  hidden object game  html5  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike Hackathon: iOS game in 7 days Apr 09 2013 03:10 AM | Posted By Arseniy Vershinin (Arsonic) in Mobile Development In this article I would like to share with you the story of creating our company’s first iOS game at a hackathon event, using a wonderful 2d graphics engine Cocos2d. It covers some technical problems, we’ve bumped into, while developing the game, as well as the process of creating the actual gameplay. Tagged With:  AppStore  development  mobile  game  cocos2d  box2d  hackathon  budget  indie  quick  week  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 31Likes Dislike How we Built an iOS game on PC Apr 08 2013 08:05 PM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Mobile Development This article chronicles Catch the Monkey from ideation to sale worldwide in the App Store. Tagged With:  game  monkey  marmalade  design  player  scene  time  tool  png  ios  Read More » | 15 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Ultrabook and Tablet Windows 8* Sensors Development Guide Sep 19 2012 12:20 PM | Posted By Deepak Vembar in Mobile Development intel.com — Tagged With:  ultrabook  windows8  win8  Read More » | 16 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Detecting Ultrabook Sensors Sep 19 2012 12:15 PM | Posted By Gael Hofemeier in Mobile Development intel.com — Tagged With:  ultrabook  windows 8  Win8  sensor  WinRT  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Introducing Xcode Tools for iPhone Development Feb 21 2012 09:35 PM | Posted By Steven F. Daniel in Mobile Development In this article by Steven F. Daniel, author of Xcode 4 iPhone Development , we shall:Learn about the features and components of the Xcode development tools.Lean about Xcode, Cocoa, Cocoa-Touch, and Objective-C.Take a look into each of the iOS Technology Layers and their Components.Take a look into what comprises the Xcode Developer set of Tools.Take a look at the new features within the iOS4 SD... Tagged With:  iphone  xcode  applications  development  ios  simulator  class  tools  objective-c  Read More » | 338 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Cocos2d: Working with Sprites Feb 21 2012 09:31 PM | Posted By Nathan Burba in Mobile Development Cocos2d is first and foremost a rich graphical API which allows a game developer easy access to a broad range of functionality. In this article, we will take a look at the basic uses of sprites.In this article by Nathan Burba, author of Cocos2d for iPhone 1 Game Development Cookbook, we will cover the following topics: Drawing spritesThe most fundamental task in 2D game development is drawing a... Tagged With:  sprite  ccsprite  velocity  bat  using  sprites  recipe  animation  draw  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Adobe Flash 11 Stage3D: Setting Up Our Tools Jan 13 2012 03:19 AM | Posted By Christer Kaitila in Mobile Development Adobe's Stage3D (previously codenamed Molehill) is a set of 3D APIs that has brought 3D to the Flash platform. Being a completely new technology, there were almost no resources to get you acquainted with this revolutionary platform, until now.In this article by Christer Kaitila, author of Adobe Flash 11 Stage3D (Molehill) Game Programming , we will:Obtain Flash 11 for your browserGet all t... Tagged With:  flash  code  new  var  flex  private  using  stage3d  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Excerpt: Game Development Essentials - Mobile Game Development Nov 22 2011 11:00 PM | Posted By Kimberly Unger and Jeannie Novak in Mobile Development Mobile Game Development, a big-picture introduction to the fastest-growing segment in entertainment, offers students the latest on developing for the iOS, Android, Windows Phone and BlackBerry platforms. This excerpt is from Chapter 5, which covers art for mobile devices Tagged With:  game  art  mobile  games  file  image  color  courtesy  size  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Learning Android Development with Unity Jun 01 2011 10:00 PM | Posted By design3 in Mobile Development A series of video tutorials on how to use Unity to develop for the Android mobile device Tagged With:  design3  development  mobile  android  unity  training  learn  game  games  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Learning iOS Game Programming Oct 20 2010 03:55 AM | Posted By Michael Daley in Mobile Development Excerpt from the book centered on the main game loop in an iOS game Tagged With:  game  loop  method  class  opengl  update  using  render  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Developing iPhone Games for Longer Battery Life Jul 19 2010 06:00 PM | Posted By Ed Welch in Mobile Development In this article I will discuss the technique developed and implemented in our new game Armageddon Wars that has extended the potential life of the iPhone’s battery during gameplay. To do this, I will demonstrate the following:Lowering the frame rate of a game increases the battery life by a significant amount.Games do not need a high frame rate when displaying a static screen, or a simple 2D an... Tagged With:  game  frame  rate  battery  fps  time  screen  loop  games  Read More » | 3 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » Mobile Development English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy