Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » APIs and Tools Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! APIs and Tools Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler Published in APIs and Tools By Apostol Dadachev - Taking a look at the problem of shader cross compilation and introducing a solution which utilizes a purely text based approach. Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Published in APIs and Tools By Kirill Kliushkin - Pain-free localization is the dream of everyone who develops software for foreign markets. It's a true story about a tool that makes the locali... Automated Deployment of Your Game Published in APIs and Tools By Craig Edwards - Learn how to bundle your game in an installer with very little effort, to sign your installer with a digital signature, and automatically upload yo... View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 8Likes Dislike Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler Apr 27 2015 08:52 AM | Posted By Apostol Dadachev in APIs and Tools Taking a look at the problem of shader cross compilation and introducing a solution which utilizes a purely text based approach. Tagged With:  shadertools  DirectX  OpenGL  HLSL  GLSL  C++  graphics  parser  programming  cross-platform  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 17 2015 05:24 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in APIs and Tools Pain-free localization is the dream of everyone who develops software for foreign markets. It's a true story about a tool that makes the localization process almost magic! Tagged With:  localization  translation  cloud technology  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 06:53 PM | Posted By Craig Edwards in APIs and Tools Learn how to bundle your game in an installer with very little effort, to sign your installer with a digital signature, and automatically upload your game to your website. Tagged With:  inno setup  installer  uninstall  code signing  uploading  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Arcade Machines and Gaming Library Pigaco - Devlog #0: Introduction & Architecture UNDER REVIEW Apr 08 2015 08:34 AM | Posted By Max Heisinger in APIs and Tools An introduction to a project which tries to make development of arcade games easier and to streamline building and providing arcade gaming machines. Tagged With:  diy  console  selfmade  selfbuilt  game  gaming  arcade  retro  shared  memory  piga  pigaco  boost  architecture  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Banshee Engine Architecture - RTTI & Serialization UNDER REVIEW Feb 06 2015 09:46 PM | Posted By Marko Pintera in APIs and Tools Learn about the design and implementation details of the run-time type information system used by the Banshee Engine. This article is a part of a larger series relating to the Banshee Engine. Tagged With:  game development  banshee  engine  banshee engine  c++  directx  opengl  3d  graphics  rtti  serialization  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 2: Models for the Location Feb 03 2015 09:22 AM | Posted By Mikhail Luzyanin in APIs and Tools We continue working on a simple game. This time we'll discuss modeling and texturing models for the location. All is done with Blender. Tagged With:  Blend4web  Blender  Game  3D Modeling  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 1: The Character Feb 03 2015 09:22 AM | Posted By Evgeny Rodygin in APIs and Tools Today we're going to start creating a fully-functional game app with Blend4Web. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  WebGL  Game  Programming  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 6: Animation and FX Feb 03 2015 09:19 AM | Posted By Mikhail Luzyanin in APIs and Tools This article is about character modeling and animation, and also about creating the effect of the deadly falling rocks. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  WebGL  Blender  Game  Animation  FX  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 7: Enriching the Game World Feb 03 2015 09:08 AM | Posted By Mikhail Luzyanin in APIs and Tools In this article, we'll explain how to create environment FX and other details which make the game world more diverse and dynamic. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  WebGL  Blender  FX  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike How to create game rankings in WiMi5 UNDER REVIEW Jan 23 2015 10:26 AM | Posted By WiMi5 in APIs and Tools This tutorial shows how to deal with Rankings in HTML5 games created with WiMi5. It’s very easy to handle, we can sum it up in three steps. Tagged With:  ranking  html5  game  create  tool  game editor  game maker  game engine  casual game  2d editor  drag and drop editor  drag and drop game  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Gentle Introduction to Google Analytics for Flash Jan 14 2015 06:25 AM | Posted By Hubert 'Koshmaar' Rutkowski in APIs and Tools Being able to check out how many players play your game, from what countries, for how long, on which levels they have problems, even do they ever visit your precious Credits screen - that sounds incredibly useful, doesn't it? Fortunately, in web browser games, there's rather easy way to get such informations. In this post I'm going to describe the process for Flash (ActionScript 3),... Tagged With:  google analytics  flash  actionscript3  playtesting  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Banshee Engine Architecture - Introduction UNDER REVIEW Nov 21 2014 02:13 PM | Posted By Marko Pintera in APIs and Tools Learn about the vision, architecture and design decisions behind Banshee Engine. This is an introductory article that is a part of a larger series. Tagged With:  game  development  toolkit  3d  graphics  c++  directx  opengl  engine  banshee  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Making a Game with Blend4Web Part 3: Level Design Sep 21 2014 11:46 PM | Posted By Mikhail Luzyanin in APIs and Tools Third part of tutorial on game development with Blend4Web. This article is about how the game scene is assembled, and also about creating the lava effect. Tagged With:  Blend4Web  Game  Blender  3D Modeling  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Introduction to Unity Test Tools Jun 20 2014 03:09 PM | Posted By Lior Tal in APIs and Tools This article introduces Unity Test Tools - an official solution for creating and executing automated tests for Unity projects without leaving the comforts of the editor. Tagged With:  unity  testing  unit-testing  automated-tests  test  qa  automatics-tests  automated-testing  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike YAML Basics and Parsing with yaml-cpp Mar 01 2014 06:15 AM | Posted By Dejaime Antônio de Oliveira Neto in APIs and Tools Yaml, differing from XML, isn't a markup language. It is much cleaner and readable at the price of a stricter syntax. The main principle is still the same, go through a document to retrieve your so useful data. This article aims to provide an overview on YAML and how to parse it in C++. Tagged With:  yaml  yaml-cpp  encoded  human readable format  serialization  c++  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Stretching Your Game To Fit The Screen Without Letterboxing - SDL2 UNDER REVIEW Jan 27 2014 12:53 PM | Posted By Alex Walters in APIs and Tools Have you tried scaling your game using the SDL_RenderSetLogicalSize or the SDL_RenderSetScale functions and gotten the ugly letter-boxing? This shows how you can just scale your game no matter what without letter-boxing using SDL2. Tagged With:  sdl2  c++  letter-boxing  stretching  scaling  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike GPU Texture Snapshot Sep 29 2013 07:36 PM | Posted By Jay Taoko in APIs and Tools What if you could make a snapshot of GPU textures from any 3D application as easily as using printf for text? Tagged With:  picopixel  sdk  texture  gpu  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Manual on Development of Visual Studio 2005-2012 and Atmel Studio Plugins in C# UNDER REVIEW Sep 17 2013 06:53 AM | Posted By Paul Eremeev in APIs and Tools About a year ago we published in our blog a series of articles on development of Visual Studio plugins in C#. We have recently revised those materials and added new sections and now invite you to have a look at the updated version of the manual. Tagged With:  visual studio  plugins  c#  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike USB Base Custom Hardware Interface for Unity3D Aug 16 2013 12:48 PM | Posted By Dilshan Jayakody in APIs and Tools In this article we demonstrate the USB base custom hardware interfacing with Unity3D game engine on top of Microsoft Windows operating system(s). Tagged With:  unity  delphi  usb  electronics  game controller  hid  custom hardware  interface  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Getting Started with Duality Aug 12 2013 05:15 AM | Posted By Fedja Adam in APIs and Tools This article teaches you how to use the Duality framework and C# for developing 2D games. Tagged With:  c#  .net  opengl  opentk  duality  game engine  2d  open source  components  tutorial  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Level Creation Concerns with Unity Aug 11 2013 12:29 PM | Posted By Lea Hayes in APIs and Tools Developers who are creating a game for the first time may find the idea of creating levels a daunting task. This post covers some of my experiences and opinions of the level creation process Tagged With:  unity  level design  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Getting Started With Rapid2D UNDER REVIEW Jul 26 2013 03:30 PM | Posted By Rapid2D in APIs and Tools This is a tutorial which will show you from scratch how to do things in our engine from using the editor, to adding some basic code to create a room which contains a player object that uses physics, a background and a timer. Tagged With:  2d  rapid2d  c++  windows 8  tablet  mobile  pc  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Introduction to GameMonkey Script Jul 25 2013 10:14 AM | Posted By Oli Wilkinson in APIs and Tools This article will introduce you to the GameMonkey Script language and API and how it can be used in your own games. Tagged With:  scripting  gamemonkey  gm script  lua  virtual machine  scripting language  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike Wrapper Pattern for Silverlight and WPF Jan 30 2012 02:21 PM | Posted By Nicolas Dorier in APIs and Tools Download sample (Silverlight and WPF) - 368 KBLicense: Ms-PLTable of contents IntroductionIt has been a long time since my last article. This one is short and a bit less creative than the previous ones, but I hope you'll like it! I hope none of you have never particularly talked about that before, but probably you have already used what I will talk about, without naming it: the wrapper pattern... Tagged With:  element  public  margin  wrapper  hideside  static  return  void  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Unity 3-0 Enter the Third Dimension Jan 27 2012 01:50 AM | Posted By Will Goldstone in APIs and Tools Before getting started with any 3D package, it is crucial to understand the environment you'll be working in.As such, in this article by Will Goldstone, author of Unity 3.x Game Development Essentials, we'll make sure you're prepared by looking at some important 3D concepts before moving on to discuss the concepts and interface of Unity itself. You will learn about:Coordinates and v... Tagged With:  unity  game  object  objects  world  you'  component  games  engine  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Technical » APIs and Tools English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy