Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Creative Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Creative Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 5Likes Dislike When do videos need voiceovers? Apr 30 2015 09:19 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Music and Sound Our thoughts about when videos for games need voiceovers, and when they don’t. There are important pluses and minuses we think everyone should be aware of Tagged With:  Videos  Voiceovers  Mobile Games  Trailers  Sound  Voice  Games  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Tips for Designing and Developing Free-to-Play Games Apr 15 2015 07:59 PM | Posted By Jose Maria Martinez, 'Hafo' in Game Design This article shows some tips on how to make your HTML5 F2P games attractive so you can monetize them via ads, the purchase of virtual goods or any other way. This article is oriented to people who knows what free-to-play games are and also have played 'Flappy Bird' more than once. Tagged With:  tips  design  f2p  free-to-play  free to play  monetize  monetise  game loop  game design  p2p  virtual goods  monetization  pay to play  powerups  power ups  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Substance Painter Review UNDER REVIEW Mar 16 2015 10:43 AM | Posted By Kelly L. Murdock in Visual Arts Take a look at this different approach to adding details to a model, not through texturing but by actually painting materials onto the model Tagged With:  review  texture  3d modeling  materials  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 3) - Forged in Steel... Mar 04 2015 03:02 PM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article, I take a look at Warcraft II and Starcraft, the "second age" of RTS. Tagged With:  Design  Retro  RTS  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Composing an Indie RPG Title Track Feb 17 2015 12:38 PM | Posted By Thomas Henshell & James Marantette in Music and Sound Composer James Marantette sheds some light on the creative process behind the Archmage Rises title track. Tagged With:  rpg  music  composing  composition  title track  archmage  indie  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 18Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 2) - Then a Blizzard came... Jan 14 2015 06:34 AM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article, I take a look at what Blizzard's Warcraft: Orcs and Humans brought to the table and how it differed from Dune II. Tagged With:  DesignRTS  Retro  Warcraft  Blizzard  Read More » | 19 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike Barebones of Quests Dec 17 2014 07:53 AM | Posted By Gavyn Bryan in Game Design "Quests" and "Missions" in Video Games all have common bare-bones, whether blatant or subtle. In this article, we'll explore the "skeletal structure" of quests in video games and how we can add "meat" to it. Tagged With:  quest  story  design  RPG  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike How to Make a Good Sequel to Your Casual Game Dec 12 2014 07:13 PM | Posted By Ievgen Leonov in Game Design To create a game hit from scratch or to make a good part two for the existing project? Which of the two options is a shortcut to success? The answer is not that obvious as it may seem, for sequel production may be a hard nut to crack. Tagged With:  developers  sequel  tips  guide  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Inside the Indie Art Process of Archmage Rises Dec 04 2014 06:20 AM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Visual Arts Thomas Henshell and Rogier van de Beek dive deep into how they make the artwork being produced for Thomas’ upcoming 2D RPG Archmage Rises. Tagged With:  art  indie  rpg  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Data Visualization in Games: Leaderboards UNDER REVIEW Nov 26 2014 02:56 PM | Posted By Erik Hazzard in Game Design Leaderboards are a visualization of achievement. Their goal is to make comparisons between some player (or item's) ranks. This is a pretty board statement because implementations of leaderboards can be found not just in arcades, not just in single or multiplayer games, but also in non-games. There are many types of leaderboards, and can produce powerful emotional reactions Tagged With:  data visualization  leaderboards  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Designing a "Playable" UI That Secretly Teaches How to Play Nov 19 2014 09:32 AM | Posted By Yowan Langlais in Game Design How to create a fun user interface that teaches players how to play your game. Tagged With:  design  user interface  UI  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 30Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 1) - It was found in a Desert... Nov 13 2014 03:04 AM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article we examine the origins of the RTS and mechanics that were revisited or forgotten. Tagged With:  Design  RTS  Dune  Retro  Read More » | 22 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Making Games is Hard Nov 07 2014 07:48 AM | Posted By Peter Cardwell-Gardner in Game Design A developer shares the story of his experience and difficulties in creating a game that's still not done. Read More » | 7 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike What Makes Old Games Addictive Oct 27 2014 03:54 PM | Posted By Miguel7 in Game Design Nostalgia aside, what makes those old-school 2D platformers, scrolling shooters, unrealistic sports games and others so addictive? Why are there so many spoofs, emulators, and even USB controllers for games that by today's standards really aren't that good? In this article I'll share what I think is the secret. Tagged With:  2-D  Mario  Zelda  shooter  platformer  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Luck in Games: Why RNG isn't the answer Oct 24 2014 01:38 PM | Posted By Elyot Grant in Game Design Hearthstone's design team told us we'd be crazy to make a game without luck. But here's the secret to why games without luck are actually more addictive, and players are far better off without it (contrary to what most AAA studios would have you believe). Tagged With:  luck  rng  hearthstone  game design  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Design of an Indie Action Game Sep 21 2014 11:46 PM | Posted By Mike Shafer in Game Design During the development of Bain's Redemption, I had to wear many hats. This article tries to convey what works and doesn't work in the context of the design of a third-person action game. Tagged With:  gameplay  ai  custom  3d  design  action  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike The Art of Feeding Time: Animation Sep 09 2014 04:29 AM | Posted By Matt Kidd in Visual Arts While some movement was best handled programmatically, Feeding Time‘s extensive animal cast and layered environments still left plenty of room for hand-crafted animation. Tagged With:  animation  art  Feeding Time  video game  game development  game art  game  game dev  game design  design  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Dynamic Narrative in The Hit Sep 09 2014 04:29 AM | Posted By Dan Stubbs in Game Design I'm currently working on a player-driven dynamic narrative system. This is the blog post I wrote in response to Ken Levine's 'Narrative Lego' GDC talk, which was originally published on Gamasutra.com. Since then I've filled in some of the gaps, and I'm planning a follow-up article, but for now I'm working full-time on developing The Hit. Tagged With:  narrative  story  design  writing  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike How to Record High Quality Video of Your Game using a Slow Computer UNDER REVIEW Sep 08 2014 09:18 AM | Posted By Jarmo Kukkola in Visual Arts I wanted to make a game play trailer for my original arcade puzzle game Futile Tiles (http://www.futiletiles.com). The game is very fast and I needed to achieve high framerate and quality for the video, which is challenging using a slow computer. Low recording frame rate can also distract controlling the game actions. Tagged With:  Youtube  record  video  gameplay  after effects  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Distilling Game Design UNDER REVIEW Sep 04 2014 08:52 PM | Posted By Teresa Munoz in Game Design Distilled Game Design is what Experience is all about, is your game in its purest form. In order to achieve true Game Design you must figure out what your basic experience is and build your game up from there. Tagged With:  Game Design  Game Experience  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Autodesk Maya 2015 Review Aug 09 2014 07:52 PM | Posted By Kelly L. Murdock in Visual Arts Maya 2015 is packed full of new features, new effects engines, improvements and updates that make it one strong tool for game artists Tagged With:  review  autodesk  maya  modeling  3d  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike 3ds Max 2015 Review Jul 23 2014 09:13 PM | Posted By Kelly L. Murdock in Visual Arts This version has a few nice surprises, but the biggest changes are under the hood. The viewports seem more responsive and the software doesn't crash nearly as often as the previous version Tagged With:  review  3ds max  3d modeling  visual arts  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike The Art of Feeding Time: Interface UNDER REVIEW Jul 17 2014 09:08 AM | Posted By Derek Koncewicz in Visual Arts In the third article about the art from the iOS game Feeding Time, the iterative process of narrowing down styles and motifs for the game's user interface is described. Tagged With:  user interface  art  Feeding Time  game art  interface  graphics  design  game design  game development  game dev  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike The Art of Feeding Time: Backgrounds Jul 10 2014 01:56 AM | Posted By Radek Koncewicz in Visual Arts In part two of a series about the art of new iOS game Feeding Time, learn about the process of nailing down background art. Tagged With:  feeding time  background  puzzle  ios  development  indie  papercraft  unity  visual  unity2d  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike The Art of Feeding Time: Characters Jul 05 2014 08:43 AM | Posted By Radek Koncewicz in Visual Arts Lead designer of Feeding Time, an iOS game with a papercraft visual style, describes the iterative process of designing characters in a grid puzzle game Tagged With:  art  animation  feeding time  puzzle  ios  development  indie  papercraft  unity  unity2d  unity3d  visual  characters  Read More » | 1 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Creative English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy