Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Creative » Game Design Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Game Design Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Tips for Designing and Developing Free-to-Play Games Published in Game Design By Jose Maria Martinez, 'Hafo' - This article shows some tips on how to make your HTML5 F2P games attractive so you can monetize them via ads, the purchase of virtual goods or any... Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 3) - Forged in Steel... Published in Game Design By Michel Mony - In this article, I take a look at Warcraft II and Starcraft, the "second age" of RTS. Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 2) - Then a Blizzard came... Published in Game Design By Michel Mony - In this article, I take a look at what Blizzard's Warcraft: Orcs and Humans brought to the table and how it differed from Dune II. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 6Likes Dislike Tips for Designing and Developing Free-to-Play Games Apr 15 2015 07:59 PM | Posted By Jose Maria Martinez, 'Hafo' in Game Design This article shows some tips on how to make your HTML5 F2P games attractive so you can monetize them via ads, the purchase of virtual goods or any other way. This article is oriented to people who knows what free-to-play games are and also have played 'Flappy Bird' more than once. Tagged With:  tips  design  f2p  free-to-play  free to play  monetize  monetise  game loop  game design  p2p  virtual goods  monetization  pay to play  powerups  power ups  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 3) - Forged in Steel... Mar 04 2015 03:02 PM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article, I take a look at Warcraft II and Starcraft, the "second age" of RTS. Tagged With:  Design  Retro  RTS  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 18Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 2) - Then a Blizzard came... Jan 14 2015 06:34 AM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article, I take a look at what Blizzard's Warcraft: Orcs and Humans brought to the table and how it differed from Dune II. Tagged With:  DesignRTS  Retro  Warcraft  Blizzard  Read More » | 19 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike Barebones of Quests Dec 17 2014 07:53 AM | Posted By Gavyn Bryan in Game Design "Quests" and "Missions" in Video Games all have common bare-bones, whether blatant or subtle. In this article, we'll explore the "skeletal structure" of quests in video games and how we can add "meat" to it. Tagged With:  quest  story  design  RPG  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike How to Make a Good Sequel to Your Casual Game Dec 12 2014 07:13 PM | Posted By Ievgen Leonov in Game Design To create a game hit from scratch or to make a good part two for the existing project? Which of the two options is a shortcut to success? The answer is not that obvious as it may seem, for sequel production may be a hard nut to crack. Tagged With:  developers  sequel  tips  guide  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Data Visualization in Games: Leaderboards UNDER REVIEW Nov 26 2014 02:56 PM | Posted By Erik Hazzard in Game Design Leaderboards are a visualization of achievement. Their goal is to make comparisons between some player (or item's) ranks. This is a pretty board statement because implementations of leaderboards can be found not just in arcades, not just in single or multiplayer games, but also in non-games. There are many types of leaderboards, and can produce powerful emotional reactions Tagged With:  data visualization  leaderboards  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Designing a "Playable" UI That Secretly Teaches How to Play Nov 19 2014 09:32 AM | Posted By Yowan Langlais in Game Design How to create a fun user interface that teaches players how to play your game. Tagged With:  design  user interface  UI  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 30Likes Dislike Retro Mortis: RTS (Part 1) - It was found in a Desert... Nov 13 2014 03:04 AM | Posted By Michel Mony in Game Design In this article we examine the origins of the RTS and mechanics that were revisited or forgotten. Tagged With:  Design  RTS  Dune  Retro  Read More » | 22 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Making Games is Hard Nov 07 2014 07:48 AM | Posted By Peter Cardwell-Gardner in Game Design A developer shares the story of his experience and difficulties in creating a game that's still not done. Read More » | 7 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike What Makes Old Games Addictive Oct 27 2014 03:54 PM | Posted By Miguel7 in Game Design Nostalgia aside, what makes those old-school 2D platformers, scrolling shooters, unrealistic sports games and others so addictive? Why are there so many spoofs, emulators, and even USB controllers for games that by today's standards really aren't that good? In this article I'll share what I think is the secret. Tagged With:  2-D  Mario  Zelda  shooter  platformer  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Luck in Games: Why RNG isn't the answer Oct 24 2014 01:38 PM | Posted By Elyot Grant in Game Design Hearthstone's design team told us we'd be crazy to make a game without luck. But here's the secret to why games without luck are actually more addictive, and players are far better off without it (contrary to what most AAA studios would have you believe). Tagged With:  luck  rng  hearthstone  game design  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Design of an Indie Action Game Sep 21 2014 11:46 PM | Posted By Mike Shafer in Game Design During the development of Bain's Redemption, I had to wear many hats. This article tries to convey what works and doesn't work in the context of the design of a third-person action game. Tagged With:  gameplay  ai  custom  3d  design  action  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Dynamic Narrative in The Hit Sep 09 2014 04:29 AM | Posted By Dan Stubbs in Game Design I'm currently working on a player-driven dynamic narrative system. This is the blog post I wrote in response to Ken Levine's 'Narrative Lego' GDC talk, which was originally published on Gamasutra.com. Since then I've filled in some of the gaps, and I'm planning a follow-up article, but for now I'm working full-time on developing The Hit. Tagged With:  narrative  story  design  writing  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Distilling Game Design UNDER REVIEW Sep 04 2014 08:52 PM | Posted By Teresa Munoz in Game Design Distilled Game Design is what Experience is all about, is your game in its purest form. In order to achieve true Game Design you must figure out what your basic experience is and build your game up from there. Tagged With:  Game Design  Game Experience  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike 4-Layers, A Narrative Design Approach Jun 21 2014 01:51 AM | Posted By Thomas Grip in Game Design A new "4-layers" approach to narrative design in games, based on a talk Thomas gave at GDC 2014. Tagged With:  narrative  design  story  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike From Donkey Kong to the Silver Screen: The Past, Present and Future of Game Cinematics UNDER REVIEW May 19 2014 06:49 PM | Posted By Martin McBain in Game Design Whilst the earliest uses of cinematics within games were very simple affairs - intros and outros or bookends to gameplay - we have moved on to stunningly impressive cinematic sequences and interactive gameplay to bring contemporary visual storytelling to life. With the lines between Hollywood movies and gloriously cinematic gaming titles becoming increasingly blurred, we are entering a whole ne... Tagged With:  cutscenes  cinematics  visual storytelling  narrative  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 21Likes Dislike 5 Core Elements of Interactive Storytelling May 09 2014 08:50 AM | Posted By Thomas Grip in Game Design Thomas (from Frictional Games) shares his personal view on 5 core elements of interactive storytelling in video games. Tagged With:  writing  interactive storytelling  narrative  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Setting an Appropriate Tone for Your Game Apr 27 2014 04:42 PM | Posted By Winston Nguyen in Game Design A technique on how to use 'embodied cognition' to set your game's atmosphere. Tagged With:  atmosphere  storytelling  writing  tone  embodied cognition  psychology  philosophy  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Character Development in Video Games Apr 22 2014 12:44 AM | Posted By Winston Nguyen in Game Design Learn how to use gameplay mechanics in order to show character progression. I'll also explain how Persona 4 uses mechanics to develop really lovable characters. Tagged With:  character  mechanics  persona 4  gaming point  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike Beginners Guide to User Testing With Children Feb 05 2014 12:21 PM | Posted By Marko Nemberg in Game Design Children are avid tech users and spend a lot of their time playing videogames. But how can we be certain that our game design works? Is it enough to use child friendly design or is there something else in play?Click to read about the nr. 1 testing method used by major game studios worldwide. Tagged With:  usability  playtesting  design  children  game testing  quality  QA  accessibility  game psychology  user testing  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike Games Are a Whole New Form of Storytelling Nov 25 2013 03:52 PM | Posted By David Colson in Game Design Stories in games are always compared to other mediums, and it never goes well. I think we need to rethink how games tell stories, and consider them a new medium of storytelling. Tagged With:  design  story  writing  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike "Not So Random Randomness" in Game Design and Programming Nov 18 2013 05:40 AM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Game Design In game design there is a kind of love-hate relationship with randomness. On the one hand it allows for variety with many types of content, on the other hand one can't "design" true randomness. How about a technique that provides random outcomes but within parameters that can be influenced to fit the game design? Tagged With:  game design  random  randomness  function  method  programming  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Using a "Leitner System" to Track a Player's Exposition to Content and Mechanics Nov 15 2013 11:37 AM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Game Design Using flashcards with the "Leitner system" is typically used by students to learn vocabulary or other facts and pieces of information. Using this technique within computer games to track a players behavior and learning progress within a game system, a game can react and tune any dynamic gameplay, content exposition or usage of game mechanics. Tagged With:  flashcards  leitner system  metrics  dynamic content  game design  programming  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 41Likes Dislike Using Psychological Principles for Great User Interfaces Oct 23 2013 09:02 AM | Posted By Brice Morrison in Game Design There are proven psychological principles to user interfaces that work. Whether you have a team of design experts or are just building with programmer art, you can use these principles to make your game easy to understand and a joy to pick up. Tagged With:  user interface  psychology  user experience  game design  hud  visual design  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Telling an Immersive and Full Story with Mobile App Games UNDER REVIEW Oct 18 2013 10:41 AM | Posted By Terry Wilson in Game Design A story in a game is not always easy, and that can especially be difficult when it comes to the more casual games found on mobile devices or as mobile applications. So here are a few tips to help the process. Tagged With:  mobile games  game story  apps  immersive story  video games  storytelling  tips  game development  game design  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Creative » Game Design English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy