Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Creative » Music and Sound Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Music and Sound Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» When do videos need voiceovers? Published in Music and Sound By Kirill Kliushkin - Our thoughts about when videos for games need voiceovers, and when they don’t. There are important pluses and minuses we think everyone should be a... Composing an Indie RPG Title Track Published in Music and Sound By Thomas Henshell & James Marantette - Composer James Marantette sheds some light on the creative process behind the Archmage Rises title track. Composing Music For Video Games - Key & Tempo Published in Music and Sound By Dan Harris & Joe Gilliver - The choice of key and tempo are of upmost importance when composing for visual media. Although this article focuses on an advert composition the sa... View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 5Likes Dislike When do videos need voiceovers? Apr 30 2015 09:19 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Music and Sound Our thoughts about when videos for games need voiceovers, and when they don’t. There are important pluses and minuses we think everyone should be aware of Tagged With:  Videos  Voiceovers  Mobile Games  Trailers  Sound  Voice  Games  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Composing an Indie RPG Title Track Feb 17 2015 12:38 PM | Posted By Thomas Henshell & James Marantette in Music and Sound Composer James Marantette sheds some light on the creative process behind the Archmage Rises title track. Tagged With:  rpg  music  composing  composition  title track  archmage  indie  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Composing Music For Video Games - Key & Tempo May 04 2014 05:33 PM | Posted By Dan Harris & Joe Gilliver in Music and Sound The choice of key and tempo are of upmost importance when composing for visual media. Although this article focuses on an advert composition the same principles apply for when composing for any area of a video game. For instance, an emotional cut scene. Tagged With:  composition  audio  music  key  tempo  Read More » | 17 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike Composing Music For Video Games: Chords Apr 11 2014 12:57 PM | Posted By Joe Gilliver, Dan Harris in Music and Sound So far in the series we have covered key and tempo with regards to composing music for video games. In the article chords are discussed. An understanding of the construction of chords and how they can be utilised effectively with visual media is key Tagged With:  composition  video game music  visual media music  ocular audio  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike So You Want to Hire a Composer Mar 11 2014 06:21 PM | Posted By Li Xiao'an in Music and Sound In the following points, I will briefly explain my own work process and professional approach to creating a single musical track for a client. I will be including some useful tips for effective communication, efficient workflow and creative considerations, as well as detailing the expertise required to take music from just an idea to a commercially acceptable product. Tagged With:  production  management  hiring  contractor  audio  composer  finding game audio  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Composing Music For Video Games - Tempo Feb 22 2014 12:13 PM | Posted By Dan Harris & Joe Gilliver in Music and Sound A brief look into why careful consideration needs to be paid to tempo when composing. Tagged With:  music composition  game audio  tempo  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike How To Make My Sample Library Sound Good - Part 1 Staccato Strings Nov 20 2013 08:26 AM | Posted By Caleb Faith in Music and Sound This is a brief explanatory tutorial to demonstrate how to get the most realistic sounds from a sample library and dealing with almost subconscious slight accents which most players make. Tagged With:  sample library  strings  staccato  how to  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Engaging Independent Creative Professionals Aug 09 2013 10:45 PM | Posted By Andrew Sebastian Li Xiao'an in Music and Sound Working tips for Clients and Contractors in the Video Game Industry. Learn how work effectively and efficiently, creating an environment that is pleasant and win-win for all parties involved. Tagged With:  contract  soundtrack  freelancer  music  audio  sound design  finding game audio  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Writing Game Music Apr 18 2013 01:52 AM | Posted By John Licato in Music and Sound Learn the basics of music theory, notation and composition to make your game sound better. Written for both musicians and non-musicians Tagged With:  composing  audio  music  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 4Likes Dislike Getting Started with Audacity Feb 24 2012 10:01 PM | Posted By Bethany Hiitola in Music and Sound Audacity is an open source audio editing software. This means that the software is free to download, and you can use it to create items that are freely distributable. You'll learn all of the basics about creating audiocasts—or podcasts—that can be uploaded to the Web and shared with the world.This article by Bethany Hiitola, author of the book Getting started with Audacity 1.3, will discuss... Tagged With:  audio  audacity  track  project  toolbar  recording  sound  microphone  software  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Once you land the gig… | Madsen Studios LLC Jan 10 2012 02:16 PM | Posted By Nathan Madsen in Music and Sound madsenstudios.com — A few simple -- but not always obvious -- tips for dealing with a project after you have landed the gig. Read More » | 1 Comments Like 0Likes Dislike Using FMOD designer to create explosion sound events May 21 2010 12:17 PM | Posted By Stephan Schütze in Music and Sound A guide to using FMOD tools to generate explosion sound effects in real time for a greater variety of effects to use when raining down massive destruction upon the player Tagged With:  sound  explosion  sounds  tutorial  materials  create  fmod  effects  gas  Read More » | 0 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Creative » Music and Sound English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy