Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Business Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Interview with Chris Rausch Published in Business By Tiffany Smith - We talk to the co-owner/co-founder of SuperVillain Studios about where he's come from and where he's going - especially with regard to SuperVillain... Interview with Dan Paladin Published in Business By Tiffany Smith - We have a short chat with The Behemoth's well-known artist Dan Paladin about his influences, artistic style, working at Behemoth and their latest t... Can Mobile Payments Help You Get Paid? Published in Business By Kevin Spector - Top 6 mobile payment considerations for online and social network game developers from the CEO of Mobile First. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 9Likes Dislike Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 09 2015 11:58 AM | Posted By Craig Edwards in Business and Law Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. Tagged With:  code signing  signing  encryption  digital signatures  security  distribution  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike The Top 10 Languages for Localizing Your Mobile Game May 07 2015 05:43 PM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management App Annie has provided useful data that gives insights into the breakdown of revenues between platforms and countries. After reading this article you'll have an idea of the countries you want to localize your game for Tagged With:  localization  mobile games  App Annie  languages  translation  revenue  statistic  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 28 2015 12:32 AM | Posted By Yowan Langlais in Business and Law Yowan describes the experience of demonstrating a game at PAX East. Tagged With:  marketing  conference  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike How to Pitch Angry Birds, If It Were an Unknown Indie Game Mar 20 2015 11:10 AM | Posted By Drew Giovannoli in Business and Law At the Red Fox Clan, we thought it would be fun to pretend that Angry Birds was still an unknown indie game as a template for how you can promote your game. We’re specifically going to write a pitch that would be emailed to reporters online. Tagged With:  How to  game review  pitch  game promotion  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike My GDC virginity: Of indie loserdom, hope and friendship. Mar 12 2015 04:32 AM | Posted By Peter Cardwell-Gardner in Event Coverage Indie developer Peter Cardwell-Gardner details his experiences of his first GDC. A tale of woe trying to pimp a failing Kickstarter for the music game, Cadence – and finding loving friendships in unexpected places. Tagged With:  gdc  conferences  Cadence  kickstarter  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Postmortem: "Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival", a game for learning languages Feb 24 2015 08:51 PM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Production and Management Our game “Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival” has just been released for the first target platform. I decided to write up this postmortem without knowing sales numbers and without being able to share details about marketing on different platforms as “the story so far”. Tagged With:  postmortem  html5  cordova  phonegap  canvas  mobile  tablets  hidden object game  educational  javascript  postmortem  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Humble Bundle Distribution Feb 09 2015 10:06 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law Have you considered doing a Humble Bundle for your game? Here's some advice and practical data on the decision. Tagged With:  bundle  humble bundle  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike For a Career in Gaming, are Game Design Degrees Worth It? Feb 03 2015 09:16 PM | Posted By Brice Morrison in Breaking Into the Industry Many students and parents believe that if they are interested in a career in games, then the best thing for them to pursue is a degree in “Game Design”, “Game Programming”, or “Game Art and Animation”. I share my recommendations against this thinking. Tagged With:  students  design  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Estimating Effort for Small Projects Jan 29 2015 07:11 AM | Posted By James Wucher in Production and Management How much work will it take? How much have you finished? When will it be done? If you have to answer these questions, read this article. Tagged With:  software  management  life cycle  estimation  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike GDC Social Tips Jan 27 2015 09:30 PM | Posted By Ming-Lun "Allen" Chou in Breaking Into the Industry The annual Game Developer Conference is a great place to meet people in the industry. Here are some tips for people preparing to break into the industry and wanting to socialize with other game developers. Tagged With:  GDC  conference  networking  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike 4 Simple Things I Learned About the Industry as a Beginner Jan 20 2015 07:51 PM | Posted By Laszlo Fuleki in Breaking Into the Industry A short article summarizing a few really important, although simple tips for anyone wanting to join professional game developers at big studios. Tagged With:  beginner  industry  game  development  professional  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike From Never Doing Game Code or Game Art... To A Full Game In Unreal Engine 4 UNDER REVIEW Jan 01 2015 03:40 AM | Posted By Markus Skupeika in Breaking Into the Industry In just 5 months I went from ZERO to ONE in developing a successful game. Here is how I did it as an indie game developer. Tagged With:  unreal engine  ue4  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike 12 Tricks to Selling Your Ideas, Your Game & Yourself Dec 09 2014 05:27 PM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Business and Law Selling is an art in itself. The developer of Archmage Rises shares what he learned from the corporate world – so you don’t have to Tagged With:  business  promotion  sales  pitch  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Linguistic Testing: Devil in the Details Dec 04 2014 06:19 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management What is linguistic testing and why it's so necessary when you localize your game (or software, or website, or application, or anything else). And bonus: 3 secrets for awesome linguistic testing Tagged With:  User Interfaces  Localization  Translation  Interface  GUI  Usability Testing  Software Testing  Games Testing  Websites  Foreign Languages  Linguistic Testing  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Setting Realistic Deadlines, Family, and Soup Nov 13 2014 11:49 AM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Production and Management How does the indie estimate a delivery date when juggling the game, family, spouse, and soup! (Recipe included.) Tagged With:  indie  software  development  game  scheduling  estimation  deadline  family  spouse  soup  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike How to Make Gameplay Trailers Like the Triple A Nov 04 2014 08:24 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law Making promotional videos for your games can be of massive marketing assistance to your franchise. I've outlined the process I've found success with and analyzed Quantum Break's gameplay trailer for greater clarity. Tagged With:  marketing  promotion  gameplay trailer  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike 300 Employees On Multiple Continents: How We Work Without An Office Oct 23 2014 07:35 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management Not having an office has had a large and positive effect on our business. Just a few management secrets - and you can make the absence of an office work for you too! Tagged With:  Offices  business development  motivation  management  task management  working remotely  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Crowdfunding as Marketing UNDER REVIEW Oct 02 2014 02:55 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law What if we reverse engineered crowdfunding platforms as a marketing tool? Tagged With:  Marketing  crowdfunding  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Naming An Indie Game Sep 27 2014 05:28 PM | Posted By Elyot Grant in Business and Law What's in a name? Find out in this exposition of how and why Lunarch Studios came up with the name "Prismata," from trademark rigamarole to sound symbolism. Tagged With:  naming  marketing  names  trademarks  prismata  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike 5 Premium Currency Pricing Trends and Tricks used by Mobile Free-To-Play Games Sep 25 2014 11:56 AM | Posted By Wolfgang Graebner in Business and Law analyses how 32 games on the App Store sell their premium currency, and notes interesting trends and tricks that emerged Tagged With:  mobile  pricing  monetization  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike Communication is a Game Development Skill Sep 11 2014 05:05 AM | Posted By Chris DeLeon in Production and Management Many game development guides and tutorials fail to acknowledge communication as a development skill. As with any other skill there are techniques to learn, concepts to master, and practice to be done. Tagged With:  game design  communication  working with a team  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Mobile Game Crowdfunding Experience from Two Kickstarter Campaigns Sep 01 2014 07:06 AM | Posted By Andrey Vlasenko in Production and Management A look at two kickstarter campaigns run for the mobile iOS game Demolition Lander, what worked and what didn't. Tagged With:  ios  arcade  demolition lander  crowdfunding  kickstarter  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Taptitude: two years of success on Windows Phone Aug 16 2014 08:47 AM | Posted By FourBros Studio in Business and Law It’s been two years since we launched Taptitude on Windows Phone, and we’re still going strong! Keeping with our tradition of openly sharing our download and revenue stats, we’d like to take a look back at the last two years to see how far we’ve come, and where we have room to improve. Tagged With:  windows phone  ecpm  mobile  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Techniques for Finding Unlisted Game Internships Aug 16 2014 08:45 AM | Posted By Brice Morrison in Breaking Into the Industry There are hundreds of game companies out there, but only the largest of them have online job websites where they list open positions. Yet, there are lots of students who find positions at small game companies who earn themselves a decent wage and some notches in their belts that can then help to propel them to better job opportunities later on.So how do you find these unlisted game internships?... Tagged With:  jobs  internships  networking  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 19Likes Dislike From Game Prototype to Release in 2 Months Aug 14 2014 01:18 PM | Posted By Dmytro Hreshko in Production and Management A look at the development of a mobile hidden object game based on research of existing games' shortfalls Tagged With:  hidden object game  postmortem  ios  mobile  android  windows  unity3d  advertising  Read More » | 6 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Business English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy