Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Breaking Into the Industry Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Breaking Into the Industry Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» For a Career in Gaming, are Game Design Degrees Worth It? Published in Breaking Into the Industry By Brice Morrison - Many students and parents believe that if they are interested in a career in games, then the best thing for them to pursue is a degree in “Game Des... GDC Social Tips Published in Breaking Into the Industry By Ming-Lun "Allen" Chou - The annual Game Developer Conference is a great place to meet people in the industry. Here are some tips for people preparing to break into the ind... 4 Simple Things I Learned About the Industry as a Beginner Published in Breaking Into the Industry By Laszlo Fuleki - A short article summarizing a few really important, although simple tips for anyone wanting to join professional game developers at big studios. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 17Likes Dislike For a Career in Gaming, are Game Design Degrees Worth It? Feb 03 2015 09:16 PM | Posted By Brice Morrison in Breaking Into the Industry Many students and parents believe that if they are interested in a career in games, then the best thing for them to pursue is a degree in “Game Design”, “Game Programming”, or “Game Art and Animation”. I share my recommendations against this thinking. Tagged With:  students  design  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike GDC Social Tips Jan 27 2015 09:30 PM | Posted By Ming-Lun "Allen" Chou in Breaking Into the Industry The annual Game Developer Conference is a great place to meet people in the industry. Here are some tips for people preparing to break into the industry and wanting to socialize with other game developers. Tagged With:  GDC  conference  networking  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike 4 Simple Things I Learned About the Industry as a Beginner Jan 20 2015 07:51 PM | Posted By Laszlo Fuleki in Breaking Into the Industry A short article summarizing a few really important, although simple tips for anyone wanting to join professional game developers at big studios. Tagged With:  beginner  industry  game  development  professional  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 7Likes Dislike From Never Doing Game Code or Game Art... To A Full Game In Unreal Engine 4 UNDER REVIEW Jan 01 2015 03:40 AM | Posted By Markus Skupeika in Breaking Into the Industry In just 5 months I went from ZERO to ONE in developing a successful game. Here is how I did it as an indie game developer. Tagged With:  unreal engine  ue4  Read More » | 12 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Techniques for Finding Unlisted Game Internships Aug 16 2014 08:45 AM | Posted By Brice Morrison in Breaking Into the Industry There are hundreds of game companies out there, but only the largest of them have online job websites where they list open positions. Yet, there are lots of students who find positions at small game companies who earn themselves a decent wage and some notches in their belts that can then help to propel them to better job opportunities later on.So how do you find these unlisted game internships?... Tagged With:  jobs  internships  networking  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Getting into Games through Education: Preparing for Interview UNDER REVIEW Jun 16 2014 02:19 PM | Posted By Liyaan Hasan (stitchs) in Breaking Into the Industry University interviews. They're scary... but this article aims to provide you with the tools you need to prepare, to get onto that Games Degree Course! Tagged With:  art  design  programming  education  science  coding  university  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 34Likes Dislike Advice For Aspiring Indie Game Developers Aug 07 2013 02:12 PM | Posted By Chris Park in Breaking Into the Industry This is a question I'm getting asked with increasing regularity: what advice do I have for other indie developers, or aspiring indie developers? Tagged With:  indie  business  advice  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Getting into Games through Education: Choosing your University Aug 06 2013 01:04 PM | Posted By Liyaan Hasan (stitchs) in Breaking Into the Industry The follow-up to 'Where do I begin?'. This time we look into what you should do in order to pick the best University for you, and your subject area. Tagged With:  art  design  programming  education  science  coding  open day  university  Read More » | 9 Comments Like 15Likes Dislike 10 Tips for a Better Cover Letter Jul 03 2013 08:45 AM | Posted By Steve Pavlina in Breaking Into the Industry Steve gives advice on creating a better cover letter based on the many job applicants he has rejected on cover letters alone Tagged With:  breaking in  cover letter  tips  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 40Likes Dislike Making it in Indie Games: Starter Guide May 17 2013 06:19 PM | Posted By Derek Yu in Breaking Into the Industry Advice on how to become a successful indie developer from a successful indie developer Tagged With:  indie  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Getting into Games through Education: "Where do I begin?" Apr 05 2013 12:59 PM | Posted By Liyaan Hasan (stitchs) in Breaking Into the Industry The first in a series of articles that explains why University might the right choice for your route into the world of Games Development! Tagged With:  art  design  programming  coding  education  science  University  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 29Likes Dislike Getting Started : Introduction to Game Development for Beginners UNDER REVIEW Mar 27 2013 06:27 AM | Posted By Casey Hardman in Breaking Into the Industry Interested in game development, but don't know anything about it? Let me introduce you to the creation of games in an understandable way. Tagged With:  game development  beginner  Read More » | 16 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike Peter Molyneux: How to get a job in games development • Interview • Eurogamer.net Feb 24 2012 04:08 PM | Posted By Eurogamer.net in Breaking Into the Industry eurogamer.net — Read More » | 1 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike So, You Have Cool Game Ideas? Dec 21 2000 08:16 AM | Posted By Cliff Bleszinski and Kenn Hoekstra in Breaking Into the Industry The reality of trying to sell your game idea to a developer. Tagged With:  game  company  idea  ideas  development  business  it'  new  time  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike So You Want to be a Game Programmer? Oct 14 1999 12:21 PM | Posted By Ian Parberry in Breaking Into the Industry So, you're interested in becoming a computer game programmer? Congratulations! Game programming is one of the most difficult, challenging, exciting, and lucrative forms of programming. If you have a genuine talent for it, you have excellent career prospects. Imagine getting paid an entry-level salary of $35,000-$45,000 for something you actually enjoy doing. When you were a ki... Tagged With:  game  computer  games  science  college  education  faculty  programming  degree  Read More » | 1 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Business » Breaking Into the Industry English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy