Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Business and Law Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Business and Law Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing Published in Business and Law By Craig Edwards - Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Published in Business and Law By Yowan Langlais - Yowan describes the experience of demonstrating a game at PAX East. How to Pitch Angry Birds, If It Were an Unknown Indie Game Published in Business and Law By Drew Giovannoli - At the Red Fox Clan, we thought it would be fun to pretend that Angry Birds was still an unknown indie game as a template for how you can promote y... View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 9Likes Dislike Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 09 2015 11:58 AM | Posted By Craig Edwards in Business and Law Learn everything you need to know about how and why you should digitally sign your games. Tagged With:  code signing  signing  encryption  digital signatures  security  distribution  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 28 2015 12:32 AM | Posted By Yowan Langlais in Business and Law Yowan describes the experience of demonstrating a game at PAX East. Tagged With:  marketing  conference  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike How to Pitch Angry Birds, If It Were an Unknown Indie Game Mar 20 2015 11:10 AM | Posted By Drew Giovannoli in Business and Law At the Red Fox Clan, we thought it would be fun to pretend that Angry Birds was still an unknown indie game as a template for how you can promote your game. We’re specifically going to write a pitch that would be emailed to reporters online. Tagged With:  How to  game review  pitch  game promotion  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Humble Bundle Distribution Feb 09 2015 10:06 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law Have you considered doing a Humble Bundle for your game? Here's some advice and practical data on the decision. Tagged With:  bundle  humble bundle  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike 12 Tricks to Selling Your Ideas, Your Game & Yourself Dec 09 2014 05:27 PM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Business and Law Selling is an art in itself. The developer of Archmage Rises shares what he learned from the corporate world – so you don’t have to Tagged With:  business  promotion  sales  pitch  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike How to Make Gameplay Trailers Like the Triple A Nov 04 2014 08:24 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law Making promotional videos for your games can be of massive marketing assistance to your franchise. I've outlined the process I've found success with and analyzed Quantum Break's gameplay trailer for greater clarity. Tagged With:  marketing  promotion  gameplay trailer  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Crowdfunding as Marketing UNDER REVIEW Oct 02 2014 02:55 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law What if we reverse engineered crowdfunding platforms as a marketing tool? Tagged With:  Marketing  crowdfunding  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Naming An Indie Game Sep 27 2014 05:28 PM | Posted By Elyot Grant in Business and Law What's in a name? Find out in this exposition of how and why Lunarch Studios came up with the name "Prismata," from trademark rigamarole to sound symbolism. Tagged With:  naming  marketing  names  trademarks  prismata  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike 5 Premium Currency Pricing Trends and Tricks used by Mobile Free-To-Play Games Sep 25 2014 11:56 AM | Posted By Wolfgang Graebner in Business and Law analyses how 32 games on the App Store sell their premium currency, and notes interesting trends and tricks that emerged Tagged With:  mobile  pricing  monetization  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 14Likes Dislike Taptitude: two years of success on Windows Phone Aug 16 2014 08:47 AM | Posted By FourBros Studio in Business and Law It’s been two years since we launched Taptitude on Windows Phone, and we’re still going strong! Keeping with our tradition of openly sharing our download and revenue stats, we’d like to take a look back at the last two years to see how far we’ve come, and where we have room to improve. Tagged With:  windows phone  ecpm  mobile  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike The Art of Feeding Time: Branding UNDER REVIEW Aug 04 2014 01:51 PM | Posted By Radek Koncewicz in Business and Law This article outlines the process of branding a game, refining its logo design and creating a mascot to represent it. Tagged With:  Feeding Time  Branding  logos  logo  art  game art  game development  game design  icons  mascot  game  gaming  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 2Likes Dislike WildStar CREDD System Explained Jul 28 2014 10:12 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law WildStar has launched a brilliant monetization system which should prove to be a game changer. Tagged With:  WildStar  CREDD  Read More » | 16 Comments Like 5Likes Dislike Investing in Community Management UNDER REVIEW Jul 11 2014 01:00 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law I seriously hope you see the benefits of proper community management. It yields so much value to your game and this article covers some of the most important examples. Tagged With:  community  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike The 4Ps of Marketing Jul 02 2014 05:52 AM | Posted By Joseph Lieberman in Business and Law Covers the bases on marketing strategy: Product, Price, Placement, Promotion Tagged With:  marketing  product  price  place  promotion  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike The Latest Evolution in Microtransactions Jun 21 2014 01:03 AM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law This seems to be a huge change in the microtransaction world and no one is talking about it Tagged With:  microtransactions  mtx  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Advertising Through YouTubers Jun 09 2014 03:24 PM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law Advertising through YouTubers is a really solid marketing strategy, but requires some basic strategy forethought. Tagged With:  advertising  marketing  youtube  social media  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Creating the Financial Model for your Company Part I Jun 04 2014 09:38 AM | Posted By Sagger Khraishi in Business and Law In this tutorial, we are going through the process of creating a 5 year plan that you can pitch to a VC or potential investor. This is Part I, where we go over the Parameters and Product spreadsheet. Tagged With:  5 year plan  parameters  products  spreadsheet  financials  income statement  operating expenses  cash flow statement  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike The Viral Formula May 31 2014 08:19 AM | Posted By Kevin Harwood in Business and Law How do you get your game to experience viral growth? Create the tools for your users to do so! Tagged With:  Marketing  business  advertising  social sharing  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Tips For Exhibiting Your Games May 08 2014 03:29 AM | Posted By Dave Mitchell in Business and Law It takes a lot of preparation and effort to run a booth at a games exhibition, let alone deal with players and press. Here are some tips to keep in mind Tagged With:  indie  pr  playtest  exhibition  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 17Likes Dislike All the Boring Bits of Paperwork you have to do as an Indie Developer Apr 15 2014 07:00 PM | Posted By Size Five in Business and Law Everyone knows that being an indie dev is the best job in the world. When you’re not just playing games on the sofa in your underpants surrounded by Crunchy Nut Cornflakes, you’re idly making guns and things that explode. Tagged With:  business  legal  startup  finance  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike Tracking Player Metrics and Views in Flash Games with Google Analytics Apr 02 2014 02:45 PM | Posted By Wolfgang Graebner in Business and Law How you can use Google Analytics to track metrics in your Flash games. Tagged With:  analytics  flash  metrics  Google analytics  playtesting  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Algo-Bot: lessons learned from our kickstarter failure Mar 18 2014 07:40 AM | Posted By Sophie Schiaratura in Business and Law After my first article regarding the development of Algo-Bot and the launch on Kickstarter, many of you asked me to explain a bit this Kickstarter first adventure. Here are the lessons we learned. Tagged With:  Kickstarter  coding game  serious game  learning game  programmer  coder  game  fail  funding  marketing  Read More » | 11 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike 4gency’s First Year Pt. 2: Node.Hack, the Problem Child Feb 16 2014 07:09 PM | Posted By Charles N. Cox in Business and Law Node.Hack is 4gency's first title, with a year and a half of lessons to teach about ads, trials, marketing, monetization, and missteps. Dig into the numbers on this multiplatform mobile action puzzler. Tagged With:  android  ios  iphone  monetization  windows phone  advertising  marketing  trials  media  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 1Likes Dislike You Don't Need to Hide Your Source Code Dec 20 2013 05:07 PM | Posted By Julian Marchant in Business and Law It's fashionable these days for authors of video games to keep the source code to these games a secret, but this is entirely unnecessary for commercialism and detrimental to players. Learn why here. Tagged With:  source code  open source  free software  DRM  modding support  Read More » | 37 Comments Like 27Likes Dislike Why your Games are Unfinished, and What To Do About It Nov 15 2013 05:32 PM | Posted By Arian Allenson M. Valdez in Business and Law Find out the most common pitfalls of beginning developers, and how successful game developers overcame them Tagged With:  games  development  marketing  business  motivation  beginner  Read More » | 14 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Business » Business and Law English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy