Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This category This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Business » Production and Management Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Production and Management Articles Article Listing Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» The Top 10 Languages for Localizing Your Mobile Game Published in Production and Management By Kirill Kliushkin - App Annie has provided useful data that gives insights into the breakdown of revenues between platforms and countries. After reading this article y... Postmortem: "Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival", a game for learning languages Published in Production and Management By Carsten Germer - Our game “Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival” has just been released for the first target platform. I decided to write up this postmortem with... Estimating Effort for Small Projects Published in Production and Management By James Wucher - How much work will it take? How much have you finished? When will it be done? If you have to answer these questions, read this article. View Complete Archive You cannot add articles Next Page » Like 10Likes Dislike The Top 10 Languages for Localizing Your Mobile Game May 07 2015 05:43 PM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management App Annie has provided useful data that gives insights into the breakdown of revenues between platforms and countries. After reading this article you'll have an idea of the countries you want to localize your game for Tagged With:  localization  mobile games  App Annie  languages  translation  revenue  statistic  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Postmortem: "Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival", a game for learning languages Feb 24 2015 08:51 PM | Posted By Carsten Germer in Production and Management Our game “Pavel Piezo - Trip to the Kite Festival” has just been released for the first target platform. I decided to write up this postmortem without knowing sales numbers and without being able to share details about marketing on different platforms as “the story so far”. Tagged With:  postmortem  html5  cordova  phonegap  canvas  mobile  tablets  hidden object game  educational  javascript  postmortem  Read More » | 2 Comments Like 12Likes Dislike Estimating Effort for Small Projects Jan 29 2015 07:11 AM | Posted By James Wucher in Production and Management How much work will it take? How much have you finished? When will it be done? If you have to answer these questions, read this article. Tagged With:  software  management  life cycle  estimation  Read More » | 8 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike Linguistic Testing: Devil in the Details Dec 04 2014 06:19 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management What is linguistic testing and why it's so necessary when you localize your game (or software, or website, or application, or anything else). And bonus: 3 secrets for awesome linguistic testing Tagged With:  User Interfaces  Localization  Translation  Interface  GUI  Usability Testing  Software Testing  Games Testing  Websites  Foreign Languages  Linguistic Testing  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 23Likes Dislike Setting Realistic Deadlines, Family, and Soup Nov 13 2014 11:49 AM | Posted By Thomas Henshell in Production and Management How does the indie estimate a delivery date when juggling the game, family, spouse, and soup! (Recipe included.) Tagged With:  indie  software  development  game  scheduling  estimation  deadline  family  spouse  soup  Read More » | 13 Comments Like 8Likes Dislike 300 Employees On Multiple Continents: How We Work Without An Office Oct 23 2014 07:35 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management Not having an office has had a large and positive effect on our business. Just a few management secrets - and you can make the absence of an office work for you too! Tagged With:  Offices  business development  motivation  management  task management  working remotely  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 20Likes Dislike Communication is a Game Development Skill Sep 11 2014 05:05 AM | Posted By Chris DeLeon in Production and Management Many game development guides and tutorials fail to acknowledge communication as a development skill. As with any other skill there are techniques to learn, concepts to master, and practice to be done. Tagged With:  game design  communication  working with a team  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Mobile Game Crowdfunding Experience from Two Kickstarter Campaigns Sep 01 2014 07:06 AM | Posted By Andrey Vlasenko in Production and Management A look at two kickstarter campaigns run for the mobile iOS game Demolition Lander, what worked and what didn't. Tagged With:  ios  arcade  demolition lander  crowdfunding  kickstarter  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 19Likes Dislike From Game Prototype to Release in 2 Months Aug 14 2014 01:18 PM | Posted By Dmytro Hreshko in Production and Management A look at the development of a mobile hidden object game based on research of existing games' shortfalls Tagged With:  hidden object game  postmortem  ios  mobile  android  windows  unity3d  advertising  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 3Likes Dislike Pitching Your Game to Asian Publishers UNDER REVIEW Jun 09 2014 10:45 PM | Posted By Michel Mony in Production and Management This article aims to support indie businesses that are interested in publishing their successful games in Asia. Tagged With:  asia  publishing  pitching  f2p  localization  Read More » | 6 Comments Like 16Likes Dislike How To Make Videos For Games Jun 06 2014 10:50 AM | Posted By Kirill Kliushkin in Production and Management Our experience will be useful both to anyone who is trying to produce video independently and to developers who are outsourcing creation of video for their games. Tagged With:  tips  videos  gaming point  video types  video idea  source materials  storyboard  voiceover  animation  music for video  audio for video  video localization  how to  advice  Read More » | 5 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Post Mortem: Da Boom! Mar 22 2014 06:10 AM | Posted By Sean "rioki" Farrell in Production and Management Da Boom! was developed over the course of the last half year in my spare time. It is a classical bomb laying game with a retro art style, but with the ability that you can play the game over the network. What went right? What went wrong? Tagged With:  postmortem  indi  deisgn  development  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 13Likes Dislike Adventures in PR… Mar 17 2014 11:41 AM | Posted By Jody Gallagher in Production and Management we realized pretty quickly no one knew who we were or cared about our little indie game. Other than my mum, no one was going to buy this thing once we finished it. So we decided to listen to the experts yelling at everyone to share what they are actually doing (Brian Baglow) and come up with some sort of plan to do that. Tagged With:  pr  gamedev  marketing  Read More » | 10 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike Development of the Game: From an Idea on a Napkin to a Campaign on Kickstarter Mar 07 2014 08:12 PM | Posted By Andrey Vlasenko in Production and Management There is nothing worse than an idea stuck in your head. At first it’s just looming at the back of your mind, then after an incubation period it makes you act. And so having worked in Enterprise software for about 7 years I have firmly decided that I want to try game development and create a game. Tagged With:  game  development  demolition lander  cocos2d  kickstarter  chipmunk  Read More » | 7 Comments Like 42Likes Dislike Getting Games Done Feb 14 2014 05:42 AM | Posted By Michel Mony in Production and Management This article is aimed at hobbyists/indie developers with limited spare time to dedicate to their projects. It seeks to help them increase their motivation (and finish their projects) all the while improving their working environment setup and productivity. Tagged With:  indie  game  development  gamedev  trello  svn  jenkins  Read More » | 25 Comments Like 11Likes Dislike When a Game Teaches You Feb 06 2014 06:58 AM | Posted By Sophie Schiaratura in Production and Management Developing Algo-Bot taught us the most important thing in game development: team communication. Read how hard it was to develop this game without killing each other. Read More » | 27 Comments Like 31Likes Dislike 10 Ways To Improve Your Indie Game Development Nov 26 2013 05:54 AM | Posted By Bratie Fanut in Production and Management I believe that a lot of good games could be great ones if some of the following ideas were acted on. Most of these suggestions are either free to implement or require nothing more than an investment of time and energy. Tagged With:  indie  games  Read More » | 17 Comments Like 6Likes Dislike How to Outsource Art Nov 19 2013 03:25 AM | Posted By Junxue Li in Production and Management This article is about how to outsource art works for video games. Tagged With:  game art  art work  outsource  how to  Read More » | 3 Comments Like 18Likes Dislike Indie tutorial: Starting a project and forming a team Aug 18 2013 11:51 PM | Posted By ANtY in Production and Management Despite what you may think, going out and finding your team may not be the best first step to creating your game. Rather, creating the game should be Tagged With:  indie  team management  startup  working with a team  Read More » | 4 Comments Like 9Likes Dislike Tips for Working With an Art Studio Aug 14 2013 11:13 PM | Posted By Christopher Haag in Production and Management This article is targeted toward game developers who have never worked with an art studio before, but want to. It includes information on what developers should have before approaching any art studio, what to do when they begin working with them, and things to keep in mind throughout the project. Tagged With:  tips  outsourcing  production  working with a team  Read More » | 1 Comments Like 10Likes Dislike How to Make Accurate Time Estimates Aug 09 2013 11:04 PM | Posted By Steve Pavlina in Production and Management Many people are really bad at estimating how much time a task will take. What can you do to get better at making accurate estimates? Here are several techniques you can use to make better time estimates Tagged With:  production  lone wolf  indie  Read More » | 0 Comments Like 41Likes Dislike General Tips on the Process of Solo Game Development Jul 19 2013 04:38 AM | Posted By Macoy Madson in Production and Management Sometimes I forget how to approach the creation of a new game and what I've learned from previous games. This article teaches you how to approach every game you make and includes some tips on each stage of development. Tagged With:  lone wolf  solo  production  tips  Read More » | 20 Comments Like 36Likes Dislike Never Team Up with the Idea Guy Jul 15 2013 09:40 PM | Posted By Albert Tedja in Production and Management Be sure that the people you team up with can actually contribute to the project's success Tagged With:  startup  project management  working with a team  Read More » | 18 Comments Like 27Likes Dislike Completion vs. Perfection Jul 09 2013 08:22 AM | Posted By Steve Pavlina in Production and Management There’s a big difference between completing a project and perfecting a project. Perfectionism frequently works against the drive for completion. In other words - when is it done? Read More » | 3 Comments Like 34Likes Dislike Overcoming Procrastination Jul 05 2013 02:10 AM | Posted By Steve Pavlina in Production and Management Procrastination can be a major problem in your career. The behavior pattern of procrastination can be triggered in many different ways, let's address these various causes of procrastination and consider intelligent ways to respond. Read More » | 7 Comments Next Page » Home » Home » Articles » Business » Production and Management English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy