Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace » Home » Forums » Community Interaction » GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas » Banner advertising from just $5! Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! Announcement: Banner advertising from just $5! Posted by Michael Tanczos Michael Tanczos Staff Senior Staff Reputation: 5541 This one is for you guys and is currently available until December 31st (The promotion has been extended and will run until further notice!)! This is an opportunity to get your announcements up on the top of our site and at the time of this post we only have two ads in rotation (which would mean almost 800,000 ad views for your ad!!) We need your help to keep the site going so for a few bucks a month we are opening up our advertising space to our members. First, read this: Opening Up Advertising to the Community Second, get yourself a GDNet+ subscription here. Yearly is the cheapest plan by the way. Third, upload your ads by purchasing one of the banner products we have in the store like the 728x90 leaderboard ad. The price to you will become FREE. Your ad will go into the rotation. Whoever takes advantage of this early will be getting almost exclusive exposure so get going! Want to help but don't have anything to advertise? If you're using an ad-blocker, please consider adding an exception so that it's disabled for our site -- for the next couple of months you'll be seeing adverts direct from your fellow community members! » Forums » Home » Forums » Community Interaction » GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas » Banner advertising from just $5! English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy