Jump to content Google Sign in options Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy      Sign In    Create Account 6 Search Advanced Search section: Google This database Forums Members Help Files Developer Journals Gallery Calendar Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Home For Beginners Articles All Articles Post an Article Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Breaking into the Industry Production and Management Interviews Business and Law Event Coverage Forums All Forums Community Interaction GDNet Lounge Coding Horrors Article Writing GDNet Comments, Suggestions and Ideas Your Announcements Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile & Console Development Build Systems & Source Control APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Writing For Games Music and Sound Visual Arts Gallery Business Breaking into the Industry Business & Law Production & Management Community Developer Journals Screenshot Showdown GDNet+ Subscriptions Gallery Books Store Top Members Classifieds Job Offers Contractors For Hire Contract Projects Hobbyist Projects Marketplace Home » Articles » Technical » APIs and Tools » Article: Distributing Your Games Watched Content New Content Banner advertising on our site currently available from just $5! 1. Learn about the promo. 2. Sign up for GDNet+. 3. Set up your advert! More Like This Creating a Windows NT/2000/XP Service Automated Deployment of Your Game Linux Game Development Part 3 Manual on Development of Visual Studio 2005-2012 and Atmel Studio Plugins in C# Sedge: An Automated Error Reporting Tool Categories (See All) Technical Game Programming General Programming Graphics Programming and Theory DirectX and XNA OpenGL Multiplayer and Network Programming Artificial Intelligence Math and Physics Mobile Development APIs and Tools Creative Game Design Music and Sound Visual Arts Business Event Coverage Breaking Into the Industry Business and Law Interviews Production and Management Gamedev.net Help Recent Resources Improve Player Retention Reacting to Behavior [Server Scripts] May 12 2015 04:22 PM | 6 Comments Dynamic vertex pulling with D3D11 Apr 29 2015 11:37 AM | 5 Comments Giving Away $17,000 Worth of Toto Temple Deluxe at Pax East Apr 27 2015 07:27 AM | 2 Comments Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Authenticode Signing May 08 2015 11:06 AM | 5 Comments Shader Cross Compilation and Savvy - The Smart Shader Cross Compiler May 15 2015 09:23 AM | 0 Comments Crowdin: Localizing Without Pain Apr 15 2015 11:07 AM | 1 Comments Automated Deployment of Your Game Apr 13 2015 10:47 AM | 3 Comments Show more » | View all recent resources» 0 Like 0Likes Dislike Distributing Your Games By Rob Segal | Published Oct 13 2003 07:02 PM in APIs and Tools nsis package install files user windows winzip functionality Hide If you find this article contains errors or problems rendering it unreadable (missing images or files, mangled code, improper text formatting, etc) please contact the editor so corrections can be made. Thank you for helping us improve this resource Introduction Distribution and or deployment (however you want to refer to it), is a key phase of any software development process. When all the development is said and done there has to be some way for the end user to install and run software. In this article I will review some of the options available to development teams, and the reasons for implementing an install package solution. Why do we need a way to package our files together for distribution? The most obvious reason is it makes installation for our happy users MUCH easier. Think of a game like Half-Life and think of all the files that are required to make it run properly. All files involved need to exist in a specific directory on your machine. Having one of the files in the wrong spot could result in lost functionality, a program crash, etc. Another reason is it saves the time having to download third party software on your own. Your program may require GLUT (Graphics Library Utility Toolkit for OpenGL), the latest version of DirectX or other necessary libraries. If the user doesn't already have these software libraries they may not know or have the desire to go to get it. They may also not want to go searching on the internet for them. Having these libraries packaged in your install program saves the user time and work. Say you have a file that you need to go in the Windows system directory. Your application is going to be installed on Windows 98/ME/2000 and XP. This operating system list is fairly common for many applications today. The Windows system directory exists in a different location for each of these different operating systems. An install package solution gives developers the ability to perform this functionality quickly and efficiently. Game developers in particular will be interested in the install package solution. Head over to the International Games Festival home page (http://ww.igf.com). I recently took a quote off their front page. It reads as follows, "New Submission Requirement For 2004: Install/uninstall Due to the large number of submissions we are expecting this year, we are requiring that all games (for both the IGF Competition and IGF Student Showcase) include an install/uninstall feature." So all you hopefuls who are submitting you're games, read on! Hopefully this article will help point you in the right direction deciding on the right install package solution to meet your needs. What is available? For many people packaging their files using Winzip, WinRAR or other popular compression software is sufficient. While this function definitely helps to download just one zip file over multiple files the user must have the appropriate decompression software to be able to open it. If we consider WinZip specifically, it's likely that many of you have it. It's been around for quite a few years and its distribution is quite high. However, there isn't a 100% guarantee that our users are going to have this software. An ideal solution would be to package all of our required files into one standalone executable. WinRAR and Winzip do allow you to package a set of files in a standalone executable but it doesn't allow much customization. Additionally, there is a supplementary charge for the functionality to make these standalone executables. This functionality gives us a way to install our files but not to uninstall them. Other nice features to have as I mentioned earlier would be to have the ability to detect an operating system. Common compression software applications like WinZip do not give us this functionality. There are solutions available giving us this customization ability. They allow both an install and uninstall feature, the ability to write registry keys, operating system detection, etc. These solutions include most notably InstallShield and Wise. They exist to make it easy for end user's to install applications. For open source developers or small companies the cost for an InstallShield license may be too costly. On the negative side, InstallShield and Wise give you the customizability but again there is the added cost of a license. On the positive side, InstallShield and Wise make use of a scripting language which gives the application more versatility. An ideal solution would be to have one package which has customization, the ability to create a standalone executable, an install/uninstall feature, operating system detection, minimal cost, etc. The "ideal" list could go on for quite some time. But, is there such a magical package available? Introducing NSIS One such packager/compiler on the internet which meets these "magical" criteria is NSIS. For those of you who haven't heard of NSIS before it stands for Nullsoft Superpimp Installation System, developed by the good folks at Nullsoft. If you've downloaded Winamp, you've used an NSIS installation package. NSIS shares many of the same properties as commercial installers. This includes access to the Windows registry, an install and uninstall mechanism and extension of its functionality through plug-in DLLs. Rather than operating through a GUI oriented application (such as in InstallShield or Wise), all work is done through a scripting language. If you know a language such as C/C++ or scripting language like PHP and/or JavaScript you shouldn't have trouble picking up the syntax. One of the great benefits of NSIS is its fantastic user community. There's a very good chance that when you post a question on the discussion forum you receive a response within one hour. Very often the reply is from the NSIS developers themselves. You can't ask for a much better response time than that! A number of tools have been created for working with NSIS so you don't have to worry about dealing with the syntax of the scripting language at all if that's not your "bag". They work very much like Install Shield or Wise would. Another great feature of NSIS is the user supported archive. It contains plug-ins, script editors, useful functions developed by and for the NSIS community and a great deal more. The archive can be found here, http://nsis.sourceforge.net/archive/ But, what about cost? NSIS has many of the features I've mentioned in this discussion for in an install package but it's got to cost a fortune for all that functionality. Quite fortunately, NSIS is open source and is free for both personal and commercial use. Examples of some NSIS installations Below I've included two screenshots. One is of an NSIS installation package I have developed working at 3DNA and the other is a screenshot from an NVIDIA driver InstallShield package. The install package I have developed includes many of the features I've mentioned at several points in this article. If you'd like to check out my handiwork it's a free download off of the 3DNA website (www.3dna.net). I would love to hear any comments you may have about it. My contact information can be found at the end of this article. Fig 1. Screenshot of a NSIS installation package Fig 2. Screenshot of an InstallShield package There's not much of a difference which is great. One of the nice features about NSIS is it allows you to customize your application to give it that professional look. To give you an idea of the compression NSIS is able to achieve I've included a comparison for you to look over. It's a table of file sizes from a website I work on. There's a good mix of JPEG, GIF, HTML, and regular text files. Approximately 615 files were compressed in all. NSIS WinZip WinRAR 31.8 MB 32.1 MB 31.2 MB Fig 3. Comparing file sizes using NSIS, WinZip, and WinRAR Generally it's pretty even across the board. I didn't do an extensive test trying out compression on all different file types and settings but it gives you a pretty good idea of the results. Additionally, WinZip and WinRAR are not install package creators, so they do not have the additional overhead of a step by step install process that is pretty much the standard today. NSIS of course does have all the nice install wizard features and yet NSIS still stacks up quite easily against WinZip and WinRAR. Below I have included a table comparing the packages I've discussed in this article. All of the packages I have listed here contain many, many more features than I would care to compare. This is a short reference only. NSIS InstallShield Wise WinZip WinRAR Open source Yes No No No No Cost Free Varies per package and features, approx $350 - $2400 Varies per package, starting at $450 Starting at $29 Starting at $29 Custom DLL plug-ins Yes Yes Yes No No User community Yes, through discussion forums Yes, through discussion forums Yes, through newsgroups No No Installer & uninstaller Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A Multi-language support Yes Yes Yes No No Standalone package after creation Yes Yes Yes Yes, extra charge for this functionality Yes Customizable user interface Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A Multi-platform support Windows 95, 98, ME, NT4, 2000, XP Windows 95, 98, ME, NT4, 2000, XP, Mac OS X, OS/400, Windows, AIX, Solaris, Linux, HP-UX, or any other flavor of UNIX Windows 95, 98, ME, NT, 2000, XP Windows 95, 98, ME, NT, 2000, XP There are applications that will allow you to unzip WinZip files on Unix platforms Windows 95, 98, ME, NT, 2000, XP There are applications that will allow you to unzip WinRAR files on Unix platforms IDE (Integrated Development Environment) Via user community tools and NSIS archive Yes Yes N/A N/A What follows are some notable features about each of the packages I've discussed throughout this article. Factors which tend to uniquely distinguish them from the rest of the group. I've tried to keep the list fairly short; this is not meant to be a feature list just a short summary of some of the more important pros and cons for each package. NSIS Pros Cost It's open source Upgrades are being made constantly to improve functionality, sometimes on a day by day basis There are very strong ties between the NSIS developers and the user community. A feature will sometimes get requested and then end up in the latest distribution the next day. One important difference between NSIS and other installers is the size of the installer overhead. While others installer add 200 KB or even several megabytes to your data, a full featured NSIS installer has a size of only 34 KB. Cost Cons Changes that are made sometimes nullify previous scripts. You will have to occasionally modify them to comply with new functionality. Everything needs to be done in the NSIS scripting language (but there are frontends available created by the user community) Limits platform to Windows InstallShield Pros Well known and have a good reputation Multi platform solutions are available Built-in debugger Cons Cost Wise Pros A lot of the functionality is done through an interface so there is less chance for user error Built-in debugger Cons Cost Limits platforms to Windows WinZip & WinRAR Pros Pretty much everyone has the ability to unzip these files If all you want to do is compress your files you don't need to worry about any kind of user interface need to design Files are extractable on Unix platforms Cons Not a complete installation package solution Cost, this can be a con depending on how many licenses you need I've included links at the end of this article to other install package libraries. Some are free; some aren't which I have noted for each link. Take a look through some of the other installers and see if any of the others suit your needs. I've concentrated on NSIS the most because I've used it the most extensively. Being a developer myself I found NSIS very easy to pick up and was beginning to look into its more advanced capabilities after a week or two. If you're familiar with the basics of Win32 programming alot of the NSIS script functions will look familiar. The other install packages available should not be ruled out. It's a case of selecting the right tool for your needs. NSIS is nice but you may not want to concentrate on your installer/uninstaller that much. Making your software easily distributable will make it easier for more people to install and enjoy it. Hopefully this article will help get you pointed in the right direction. Questions or comments can be directed to me (Rob Segal) at rsegal@3dna.net Special thanks to Amir Szekely and Joost Verburg for their reviews and contributions of this article. Install package websites NSIS – http://nsis.sourceforge.net (FREE) Inno Setup - http://www.jrsoftware.org/isinfo.php (FREE) INF Tool - http://www.inner-smile.com/dl_inf.htm (FREE) Click Team Install Maker – http://www.clickteam.com (FREE) Zip Genius - www.zipgenius.it (FREE) InstallLib - http://sourceforge.n...cts/installlib/ (FREE) Wise – http://www.wise.com InstallShield - http://www.installshield.com Ghost Installer – http://www.ginstall.com WinZip – http://www.winzip.com WinRAR – http://www.winrar.com Comments Note: Please offer only positive, constructive comments - we are looking to promote a positive atmosphere where collaboration is valued above all else. Home » Home » Articles » Technical » APIs and Tools » Article: Distributing Your Games English (USA) English (USA) English (USA) (COPY) Mark Community Read Forums Members Developer Journals Gallery Downloads Resources Store Classifieds Tracker Links Mark all as read Help PARTNERS Copyright © 1999-2015 GameDev.Net LLC GameDev.net™, the GameDev.net logo, and GDNet™ are trademarks of GameDev.net, LLC Navigation Home For Beginners Technical Creative Business Customer Service GDNet+ Subscriptions Job Advertising Terms of Service Privacy Policy Company Info About Us Advertise on Gamedev.net Contact Us Sign In   Use Google   Use Facebook   Use Twitter Need an account? Register now! Username Password I've forgotten my password Remember me This is not recommended for shared computers Sign in anonymously Don't add me to the active users list Privacy Policy